experimenten uitgevoerd door de antropoloog Robert Corruccini en zijn collega's in de jaren tachtig. 
Deze studies bij apen (met name eekhoornaapjes en bavianen) toonden aan dat de consistentie van het voedsel tijdens de groei een directe invloed heeft op de ontwikkeling van de kaak en de occlusie (de manier waarop de tanden op elkaar passen).
Details van het experiment
Opzet: Twee groepen apen werden van jongs af aan op verschillende diëten grootgebracht.
Groep 1 (Hard dieet): Kreeg natuurlijke, taaie of harde voeding die intensief kauwen vereiste, zoals standaard apenbrokken.
Groep 2 (Zacht dieet): Kreeg kunstmatig zacht voedsel (vergelijkbaar met zachte toffee of gepureerd voedsel) dat nauwelijks kauwbewegingen nodig had, maar qua voedingswaarde vergelijkbaar was met het harde dieet.
Resultaten: De verschillen in kaak- en gebitsontwikkeling waren significant.
De apen op het harde dieet ontwikkelden bredere en hogere gezichten, dikkere kaakbeenderen en goed uitgelijnde tanden (goede occlusie).
De apen op het zachte dieet vertoonden vaak ernstige malocclusie (scheve tanden, overvolle premolaren, smallere tandbogen en een minder ontwikkelde onderkaak).
Conclusie: De afwezigheid van voldoende kauwstimulatie tijdens de kritieke groeifase resulteert in een verminderde groei van het kaak- en aangezichtsskelet. Hierdoor is er niet genoeg ruimte voor alle tanden om correct door te breken, wat leidt tot scheefstand. 
Relevantie voor de mens
De resultaten van deze apenexperimenten ondersteunen de theorie dat de toename van malocclusie bij moderne mensen (die vaak zeer bewerkte en zachte voeding eten) het gevolg kan zijn van een gebrek aan kauwactiviteit, in plaats van uitsluitend genetische aanleg. Onze voorouders aten veel harder en taaier voedsel, wat bijdroeg aan een robuustere kaakontwikkeling. 
AI responses may include mistakes. Learn more




undefined
undefined
undefined
4 sites
SCIENCE WATCH; Chewing for Good Teeth - The New York ...
28 Sept 1982 — Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors or other problems; we are continuing to work to improve thes...

The New York Times

Effects of food processing on masticatory strain and ...
Most experimental data on facial growth responses to masticatory loading come from studies on non-human anthropoids and other mamm...

SleepClinic

in the vervet monkey (cercopithecus aethiops)
The hard-food diet consisted of Purina Monkey Chow (nutritionally balanced biscuits) and controlled amounts of fruits and some veg...

Case Western Reserve University
Show all





---


The toll of shrinking jaws on human health
Read next:
Along with Stanford news and stories, show me:
We want to provide announcements, events, leadership messages and resources that are relevant to you. Your selection is stored in a browser cookie which you can remove at any time using “Clear all personalization” below.
Stanford Report cookie usage information
We want to provide stories, announcements, events, leadership messages and resources that are relevant to you. Your selection is stored in a browser cookie which you can remove at any time by visiting the "Show me..." menu at the top right of the page. For more, read our cookie policy.
July 21st, 2020 | 1 min readScience & EngineeringA hidden epidemic of shrinking jaws is behind many orthodontic and health issues, Stanford researchers say
The shrinking of the human jaw in modern humans is not due to genetics but is a lifestyle disease that can be proactively addressed, according to Stanford researchers.
For many of us, orthodontic work – getting fitted with braces, wearing retainers – was just a late-childhood rite of passage. The same went for the pulling of wisdom teeth in early adulthood. Other common conditions, including jaw pain and obstructed sleep apnea – when slack throat muscles interrupt breathing during rest – also just seem like par for the course.
A new study says that parents and caregivers can take steps to promote proper mouth, jawbone and facial musculature development in children to help stave off future health burdens and chronic conditions. (Image credit: Getty Images)
The broader scientific community has largely deemed the underlying abnormality behind these problems as hereditary and untreatable, and opted to deal with symptoms through medical devices and after-the-fact interventions.
But in a new study, Stanford researchers and colleagues argue that all these issues and more are actually relatively new problems afflicting modern humans and can be traced to a shrinking of our jaws. Moreover, they maintain that this “jaws epidemic” is not primarily genetic in origin, as previously thought, but rather a lifestyle disease. That means the epidemic is largely the result of human practices and akin to obesity, type 2 diabetes, heart disease and some cancers.
The study – published in the journal BioScience – marshals the growing evidence from studies conducted around the world surrounding the jaws epidemic, as well as how to address it proactively. Parents and caregivers can take steps to promote proper mouth, jawbone and facial musculature development in children, the study advises, to help stave off future health burdens and chronic conditions.
“The jaws epidemic is very serious, but the good news is, we can actually do something about it,” said Paul Ehrlich, the Bing Professor of Population Studies, Emeritus, at Stanford and one of the study’s authors.
The new study builds upon a book Ehrlich co-wrote with orthodontist and lead study author Sandra Kahn entitled Jaws: The Story of a Hidden Epidemic, published by Stanford University Press in 2018. Two other Stanford researchers, Robert Sapolsky and Marcus Feldman, have contributed their expertise to the new study. Seng-Mun “Simon” Wong, a general dentist in private practice in Australia, was also a co-author.
Rooted in lifestyle, not genetics
Anthropologists have long noted the significant differences between the jaws and teeth in modern skulls compared to pre-agricultural, hunter-gatherer humans from thousands of years ago. The differences are stark even compared to humans who lived as recently as a century-and-a-half ago during pre-industrial times. These bygone humans showed little teeth crowding, impaction of their wisdom teeth (a leading reason for their surgical removal nowadays) or malocclusion – the abnormal positioning of the upper and lower teeth when the mouth is closed.
Related Story
Science & TechnologyPaul Ehrlich on the problems of the modern jaw
Paul Ehrlich wants you to shut your mouth – for your health. According to Ehrlich’s new book, mouth breathing, among other modern habits, has led to an epidemic of small jaws and many troubling health consequences.
Assuming that genetics are chiefly responsible for the sudden modern rise of these dental maladies does not make sense, said Ehrlich. “There’s not been enough time for evolution over the span of only several generations to have made our jaws shrink,” said Ehrlich. Nor is there any evidence of selection pressures that would have favored smaller jawed-people producing more offspring – and thus perpetuating the trait – than regular-jawed people.
“The evidence of a genetic contribution to the jaws epidemic is not strong,” said Feldman, who is a population geneticist and the Burnet C. and Mildred Finley Wohlford Professor and professor of biology.
Instead, profound physiological changes can occur in human populations over short intervals, Feldman pointed out, purely as a result of environmental factors, such as dietary choices and cultural norms. For instance, since World War II, a switchover from heavy rice consumption to more dairy and protein in childhood has been linked to Japanese men gaining around 5 inches in average adult height.
This goes to show that in many cases, lifestyle choices can have just as powerful if not more of an influence on human traits than underlying genetics. “A genetic contribution to a trait, if there is one, does not necessarily sentence you to a life with that trait,” said Feldman. “In almost all cases, you cannot intervene medically to alter a genetic contribution; it’s not actionable. But what is actionable are the things talked about in this study, as well as Paul and Sandra’s book.”
Contributing factors
Available evidence points to the jaws epidemic arising as humanity underwent sweeping behavioral changes with the advent of agriculture, sedentism (settling in one place for extended periods) and industrialization. One obvious factor is the softening of diets, especially with the relatively recent invention of processed foods. Also, less chewing is needed nowadays to extract adequate nutrition – our ancestors certainly did not enjoy the sustentative luxury of slurping down protein shakes.
A less obvious, though more significant reason behind the jaws epidemic, Ehrlich and colleagues contend, has been the rise of what they describe as bad oral posture. Our bones grow, develop and change shape under the influences of gentle but persistent pressures, multiple studies have shown. The proper development of the jaw and its associated soft tissues is guided by oral posture – the positioning of the jaws and the tongue during times when children are not eating or speaking. This positioning is especially important overnight during long sleep stretches, when swallowing maintains the correct, gentle pressures. With both children and adults now sleeping on forgiving mattresses and pillows, instead of the firm ground as their ancestors did, mouths are likelier to fall open, disrupting positioning and swallowing.
To promote the proper development of the jaw, the answer is not to start sleeping on rocks. Rather, basic practices such as having children chew sugar-free gum, as well as giving babies less mushy foods as they transition to solid foods, can help, the researchers say. Kahn and Wong also practice what they call forwardontics, which includes exercises such as proper breathing and swallowing patterns to guide jaw growth in children as young as 2 versus waiting until children are older and require more severe interventions. To raise awareness of the jaws epidemic and how to better address it, Ehrlich and his co-authors have been giving lectures to conventions of orthodontists and seen some positive momentum. “There’s no question that some clinical practices are moving in this direction,” said Ehrlich, “but we have a lot more work to do.”
Better living, starting from the jaw
Benefits are not just limited to straighter teeth, roomier jaws and stronger oral muscles. Cutting down on sleep deprivation from sleep apnea is another gain, which has myriad knock-on benefits. Sleep deprivation increases stress, which is associated with greater risks of heart disease, high blood pressure, depression, cancer and Alzheimer’s disease in adult populations, and with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children.
“The maladaptive ‘jaws’ profile can disrupt our stress response and ultimately bring about greater stress and chronic activation of the body’s stress response,” said Sapolsky, the John A. and Cynthia Fry Gunn Professor and a professor of biology, of neurology and neurological sciences and of neurosurgery, whose research focuses on stress.
Ehrlich hopes that increased attention and research geared toward the jaws epidemic can turn the tide.
“We’re going to continue learning the causes of the jaws epidemic and continue getting the word out on how this is a highly treatable condition early on in life,” said Ehrlich. “Parents and caregivers, in collaboration with dentists and orthodontists, can all help children to avoid some serious health problems later on in their lives.”
Ehrlich, Sapolsky and Feldman are faculty in the School of Humanities and Sciences. Sapolsky and Feldman are also members of Stanford Bio-X and the Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute. Feldman is also a member of the Stanford Cancer Institute and the Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment.
To read all stories about Stanford science, subscribe to the biweeklyStanford Science Digest.
Media Contacts
Ker Than, Stanford News Service: (650) 723-9820, kerthan@stanford.edu
Author
Adam Hadhazy
Campus unit
Stanford School of Humanities & Sciences Related topics
Science & Engineering Biology Share this story
Research Matters
Groundbreaking innovations that begin in Stanford labs flow freely into private industry to improve human well-being, fuel the economy, and strengthen American competitiveness.Learn more about research at StanfordStories for you
Popular stories
1 A day in the life of Cardinal hoops star Ebuka Okorie
2 Step inside a class on the student-athlete experience
3 Two from Stanford receive 2026 Churchill Scholarships
4 Stanford’s farm goes fully electric
5 Howard Wolf to retire as president of the Stanford Alumni Association
Read next
View all Read nextNew chip-sized optical amplifier can intensify light 100 times
Science & Engineering Research
Light-based platform sets the stage for quantum supercomputers
Science & Engineering Research
Report shares latest innovations across 10 frontier technologies
Science & Engineering Research
SLAC experts explore dark energy and cosmic mysteries
Science & Engineering Q&A
New atlas could help researchers studying neurological disease
Science & Engineering Research
Stanford merges nanotechnology facilities to accelerate research
Science & Engineering Q&A
1 Stanford Home
2 Maps & Directions
3 Search Stanford
4 Emergency Info
1 Terms of Use
2 Privacy
3 Copyright
4 Trademarks
5 Non-Discrimination
6 Accessibility
© Copyright Stanford University. Stanford, California 94305.






https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.7123221#:~:text=Abstract,a%20determinant%20of%20occlusal%20health.

Occlusal Variation Related to Soft Diet in a Nonhuman Primate
Robert S. Corruccini and Robert M. BeecherAuthors Info & Affiliations
Science
1 Oct 1982
Vol 218, Issue 4567
pp. 74-76
DOI: 10.1126/science.7123221

Abstract
Among 43 squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) raised either on naturally tough or on artificially soft foods, there are significant differences in occlusal features. Animals raised on soft foods show more rotated and displaced teeth, crowded premolars, and absolutely and relatively narrower dental arches. Dietary consistency may be a determinant of occlusal health.
Access the full article
View all access options to continue reading this article.

ALREADY A SUBSCRIBER OR AAAS MEMBER? Sign in as an individual or via your institution
References
BARBER, C.G., EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL CONSISTENCY OF DIET ON CONDYLAR GROWTH OF RAT MANDIBLE, JOURNAL OF DENTAL RESEARCH 42: 848 (1963).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
BAUME, L.J., INT DENT J 23: 530 (1973).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
BEECHER, R.M., EFFECTS OF DIETARY CONSISTENCY ON CRANIOFACIAL AND OCCLUSAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE RAT, ANGLE ORTHODONTIST 51: 61 (1981).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
CHARLIER, J.P., EFFECTS OF MANDIBULAR HYPERPROPULSION ON PRECHONDROBLASTIC ZONE OF YOUNG RAT CONDYLE, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS 55: 71 (1969).
Google Scholar
CORRUCCINI, R.S., OCCLUSAL VARIATION IN A RURAL KENTUCKY COMMUNITY, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 79: 250 (1981).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
CORRUCCINI, R.S., GENETIC-ANALYSIS OF OCCLUSAL VARIATION IN TWINS, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 78: 140 (1980).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
DRAKER, H.L., AM J ORTHOD 46: 295 (1960).
Google Scholar
GARN, S.M., RESEARCH AND MALOCCLUSION, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 47: 661 (1961).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
HARRIS, E.F., A STUDY OF OCCLUSION AND ARCH WIDTHS IN FAMILIES, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 78: 155 (1980).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
HARVOLD, E.P., PRIMATE EXPERIMENTS ON ORAL SENSATION AND DENTAL MALOCCLUSIONS, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 63: 494 (1973).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
HINIKER, J. J., JOURNAL OF PROSTHETIC DENTISTRY 16: 503 (1966).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
KAY, R.F., FUNCTIONAL ADAPTATIONS OF PRIMATE MOLAR TEETH, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY 43: 195 (1975).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
Kelley, J., Vital and Health Statistics 11 162 (1977).
Google Scholar
LAVELLE, CLB, MAXILLARY AND MANDIBULAR TOOTH SIZE IN DIFFERENT RACIAL GROUPS AND IN DIFFERENT OCCLUSAL CATEGORIES, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS 61: 29 (1972).
Google Scholar
LOMBARDI, A.V., MALOCCLUSION IN KWAIO, A MELANESIAN GROUP ON MALAITA, SOLOMON-ISLANDS, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36: 283 (1972).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
LUNDSTROM, A, TOOTH SIZE OCCLUSION (1948).
Google Scholar
MCNAMARA, J.A., NEUROMUSCULAR AND SKELETAL ADAPTATIONS TO ALTERED FUNCTION IN OROFACIAL REGION, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 64: 578 (1973).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
MILLS, JRE, DENT PRACTNR BRISTOL 6: 47 (1955).
Google Scholar
MOORE, W.J., J ZOOL 146: 123 (1965).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
MOORREES, CFA, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY 12: 77 (1954).
Google Scholar
POTTER, RHY, VARIANCE OF OCCLUSION TRAITS IN TWINS, JOURNAL OF CRANIOFACIAL GENETICS AND DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY 1: 217 (1981).
Google Scholar
ROSENBERGER, A.L., FUNCTIONAL PATTERNS OF MOLAR OCCLUSION IN PLATYRRHINE PRIMATES, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY 45: 281 (1976).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
SMITH, R.J., PROBLEMS AND METHODS IN RESEARCH ON GENETICS OF DENTAL OCCLUSION, ANGLE ORTHODONTIST 47: 65 (1977).
Web of Science
Google Scholar
WATT, D.G., THE EFFECTS OF THE PHYSICAL CONSISTENCY OF FOOD ON THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE MANDIBLE AND THE MAXILLA OF THE RAT, AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ORTHODONTICS AND DENTOFACIAL ORTHOPEDICS 37: 895 (1951).
Web of Science
Google





---




Evolutie en Omgevingsfactoren van de Menselijke Kaak en Gezondheid
Bronnen
Chat
Studio
A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour - Research journals - PLOS
Bronhandleiding
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzDcNiJrzzRO3rKgZywSbEPu7rhsnwZfM-DkoHx5W0Yn7zctLppAH9yWLQ3WIUY2yursNhba0sXEBtie7T69FtEKUVV6tFtmapEblrL_4Az16lKEu_N_kVjcoNfs65LJr89PZrT=w38-h49-v0
RESEARCH ARTICLE
A dental revolution: The association between
occlusion and chewing behaviour
Christopher Martin SilvesterID 1☯*, Ottmar Kullmer2,3‡, Simon Hillson1‡
1 Institute of Archaeology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2 Department of
Paleoanthropology, Senckenberg Research Institute and Natural History Museum Frankfurt, Frankfurt,
Germany, 3 Department of Palaeobiology and Environment, Institute of Ecology, Evolution, and Diversity,
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ These authors also contributed equally to this work.
* christopher.silvester.15@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
Dentistry is confronted with the functional and aesthetic consequences that result from an
increased prevalence of misaligned and discrepant dental occlusal relations in modern
industrialised societies. Previous studies have indicated that a reduction in jaw size in
response to softer and more heavily processed foods during and following the Industrial
Revolution (1,700 CE to present) was an important factor in increased levels of poor dental
occlusion. The functional demands placed on the masticatory system play a crucial role in
jaw ontogenetic development; however, the way in which chewing behaviours changed in
response to the consumption of softer foods during this period remains poorly understood.
Here we show that eating more heavily processed food has radically transformed occlusal
power stroke kinematics. Results of virtual 3D analysis of the dental macrowear patterns of
molars in 104 individuals dating to the Industrial Revolution (1,700–1,900 CE), and 130 of
their medieval and early post-medieval antecedents (1,100–1,700 CE) revealed changes in
masticatory behaviour that occurred during the early stages of the transition towards eating
more heavily processed foods. The industrial-era groups examined chewed with a reduced
transverse component of jaw movement. These results show a diminished sequence of
occlusal contacts indicating that a dental revolution has taken place in modern times, involv-
ing a dramatic shift in the way in which teeth occlude and wear during mastication. Molar
macrowear suggests a close connection between progressive changes in chewing since the
industrialization of food production and an increase in the prevalence of poor dental occlu-
sion in modern societies.
Introduction
An increased prevalence of misaligned and crowded dental arches among industrialised
groups has been attributed to the consumption of a more heavily extraorally processed diet [1,
2]. Developments in food processing technologies and agriculture have effectively removed the
abrasive and fibrous content from the diet of modern humans in industrialised societies [3].
PLOS ONE
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Silvester CM, Kullmer O, Hillson S (2021)
A dental revolution: The association between
occlusion and chewing behaviour. PLoS ONE
16(12): e0261404. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0261404
Editor: Luca Bondioli, University of Padova:
Universita degli Studi di Padova, ITALY
Received: April 14, 2021
Accepted: December 1, 2021
Published: December 15, 2021
Copyright: © 2021 Silvester et al. This is an open
access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author and source are credited.
Data Availability Statement: All relevant data are
within the manuscript and its Supporting
Information files.
Funding: This work was funded by the London Arts
and Humanities Partnership; a UK Arts &
Humanities Research Council-funded Doctoral
Training Partnership. We are thankful to the
German Science Foundation (DFG) for financial
support of the programming of the OFA Software
within the frame of the DFG Research Unit 771
“Function and performance enhancement in the
This replaced the coarser dietary pattern of pre-industrial times [4, 5]. A dietary revolution,
which swept across Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries, began this process alongside
revolutions in industry, agriculture and transportation [6]. By the close of the 19th century,
food production had been transformed into a highly mechanised and large-scale industry pro-
ducing increasingly heavily processed and standardised foods [7–9]. The age of sugar and pro-
cessed food has continued into the 21st century, characterising the eating habits of vast swathes
of the global population, and constituting a marked departure from the foods that were promi-
nent throughout the evolution of hominins [10].
A reduction in jaw dimensions and an increase in poor dental occlusion among modern
groups has been discussed as an adaptive consequence of the reduced dental processing of the
softer diet that emerged during and following the Industrial Revolution (1760–1840 CE) [11–
14]. This is because the upper and lower jaws are highly plastic during development and
growth and are shaped by the demands placed upon the masticatory system, principally during
chewing [15, 16]. In the absence of sufficient alveolar growth, inadequate space for emerging
teeth and disharmonious jaw relationships are anticipated [17–19]. Consequently, it has been
hypothesised that underlying these changes are differences in chewing behaviour when com-
pared to pre-industrial groups [1, 2, 14]. This hypothesis, however, remains to be tested.
Clinical feeding studies indicate that human chewing behaviours adapt to the mechanical
properties of the food consumed, such as toughness and hardness, as well as their extrinsic sur-
face characteristics, such as stickiness, particle size and roughness [20–23]. Different hardness
and toughness properties require different types of jaw movement and tooth-tooth interaction
to effect fracture [24, 25]. As foods became increasingly heavily processed in the modern era,
changes in chewing behaviours would be anticipated and phenotypic changes in craniofacial
structures would be the result. Orthodontic treatment currently focuses on the therapeutic
modification of occlusion once often functionally and aesthetically compromised relationships
have already developed [26]. Groups consuming coarser and biomechanically demanding
food stuffs often exhibit low prevalence rates of malocclusion when compared to industrialised
societies; this has been used as evidence to support artificially inducing the environmental con-
ditions these non-industrialised groups experience during development and growth to reduce
the likelihood of occlusal problems developing [18, 27]. To address the practicalities of the pri-
mary prevention of the development of occlusal problems, differences between the masticatory
behaviours of pre-industrial and industrialised human groups need to be investigated.
In humans, the chewing cycle begins with puncture-crushing cycles in which the teeth
come together in a vertically directed squashing action comparable to the crushing action of a
pestle and mortar [28, 29]. Later in the chewing sequence, as the mass of food is reduced, the
surfaces of the teeth come together more closely in a movement called the power stroke. This
is divided into two phases. In phase I, the later part of jaw closing, the lower molars on the
working side move from a lateral position following an upward, anteriorly and medially
directed trajectory terminating in maximum intercuspation [30]. The lower teeth then follow
an anterior, medially and slightly downward directed movement during phase II of the power
stroke which is followed by jaw opening [30, 31].
During the power stroke, a layer of particles suspended in saliva, likely including a combi-
nation of food particles, abrasives and detached enamel, is present between the tooth surfaces.
This results in the development of dental wear facets, highly polished planar surfaces, at spe-
cific areas of the occlusal surface against which abrasive particles are repeatedly moved across
and trapped against as the dental surfaces slide past one another during the power stroke. Each
wear facet that develops as a result of the masticatory power stroke has a corresponding wear
facet in the teeth of the opposing dental arch [32, 33]. The jaw movements responsible for the
creation of dental wear facets during the chewing cycle can be reconstructed from their
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
mammalian dentition - phylogenetic and
ontogenetic impact on the masticatory apparatus.
Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
orientation and inclination [30, 34, 35]. Wear facets have been used to infer the inclination
and orientation of the occlusal portion of the chewing cycles of extinct and extant mammals
[36, 37], and to reconstruct occlusal relationships [34], and to compare the dietary and masti-
catory behaviours of hominids [38–41]. Wear facets may also result from para-masticatory
activities such as bruxism, the repetitive grinding or clenching, or also by the use of teeth as a
third hand [42].
Bread was the principal dietary staple in both the pre-industrial and industrial groups. In
the medieval period, cereals formed up to 80% of calorific intake [43]. Similarly, the lower clas-
ses in the 19th century typically subsisted on a monotonous diet of bread, potatoes, sugar and
sweetened tea [7, 44–46]. Despite this, the physical properties of the bread eaten were dramati-
cally altered by the technological developments in milling that occurred during the Industrial
Revolution. In the medieval period, grains were pulverised to form a coarse mixture contain-
ing all parts of the grain, including a good deal of finely ground bran and most of the germ,
and a high quantity of abrasive particles were retained in the final flour [8, 47]. This resulted in
loaves that were coarse, hard and tough when compared to the bread consumed during the
Industrial Revolution [43]. Developments in grinding and sieving techniques within the mill-
ing process meant that by the close of the 19th century soft white wheaten bread made from
finely milled flour became accessible to all social classes [44]. For this reason, it would be antic-
ipated that chewing behaviours and dental wear patterns in the industrial period would reflect
this shift towards the consumption of softer and more heavily processed dietary staples when
compared to their pre-industrial counterparts.
The aim of this paper is to determine whether changes in chewing behaviour occurred as a
result of the consumption of more heavily processed staple foods during the Industrial Revolu-
tion. A method of three-dimensional dental macrowear pattern analysis [30, 35, 48], Occlusal
Fingerprint Analysis (OFA), was used to compare the molar macrowear patterns and to recon-
struct the occlusal behaviours of individuals from the industrial era (1,700–1,900 CE) and a
pre-industrial group dating to the medieval and early post-medieval periods (1,100–1,700 CE).
Static OFA was used to analyse the molar macrowear patterns [48], and the dynamic OFA [30]
was performed to reconstruct occlusal power stroke kinematics for testing the following null
hypotheses: (1) there are no significant differences in wear facet area proportions, and wear
facet inclinations are consistent in lower second molar macrowear patterns between the pre-
industrial and industrial group; (2) the power stroke trajectories and the development of occlu-
sal contact areas are similar between the two groups; (3) there are no significant differences in
occlusal topography between the groups; (4) potential confounding factors such as age-at-
death and sex of an individual do not impact the molar macrowear patterns observed.
An association between changes in chewing behaviour and the increased prevalence of
poor occlusion evident in industrialised societies may inform functional and preventative
treatments in the context of contemporary dental practice.
Materials and methods
Selection of skeletal assemblages
Specimens were selected from five British cemetery assemblages dating to the medieval and
early post-medieval periods (n = 130) and from four industrial era British cemeteries (n = 103)
(Fig 1). The ethical guidelines for handling human remains outlined by UCL, the University of
Bradford, University of Sheffield and Museum of London were adhered to during data collec-
tion (https://www.ucl.ac.uk/archaeology/research/ethics, https://www.bradford.ac.uk/arch
aeological-forensic-sciences/facilities/barc/BARC_human_remains_policy.pdf, https://www.
sheffield.ac.uk/polopoly_fs/1.573395!/file/Guidelines_for_conduct_in_osteology_labs.pdf,
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy1dXX-q_DGxJkFn0EZRFaC8uMF4gULu2O_VJv5J0HVQBMr_bbEDPDaDI8Y_xarwwLoip5lAVIkE5SwnoQZvUtvVwCGQDs_wpdoA-H5rFS9y_tYbthuBIOKQ4d4IEoxnEBtVaLSvw=w1280-h839-v0
https://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/application/files/5714/8129/0350/Museum_of_London_
Policy_for_the_Care_of_Human_Remains.pdf). No permits were required for the described
study beyond the written permissions given by the individual institutions responsible for the
human remains. The study complied with all relevant regulations.
The principal research question sought to identify differences in masticatory behaviours
following the introduction of more heavily processed and softer dietary staples in the industrial
period. Historical and archaeological evidence indicated that the majority of assemblages
selected were largely representative of the average diet and lifestyle in either the medieval, early
post-medieval or industrial periods (Table 1). A range of socioeconomic groups and regions
were represented by the assemblages selected in order to encompass a portion of the social and
dietary variability described within each period across England. The two study groups were
built up as follows:
• Each assemblage was dated to either the medieval and early post-medieval periods (1100–
1700 CE) or the industrial period (1700–1900 CE). Where inhumations at a single cemetery
overlapped both periods, contextual information for each burial had to be adequate to disen-
tangle the earlier from the later burials. The only cemetery selected that required separation
into early and later phases was St Michael’s Litten, Chichester (ESC11), which dated from
1550–1900 CE.
• Sufficient contextual information for each assemblage had to be available to characterise the
general profile of the individuals interred at the site.
Fig 1. Map showing the location of the cemetery assemblages examined in the current research. Assemblages were excavated at towns
and cities across England and represented a variety of burial contexts, including lay cemeteries, those associated with monasteries and a
leper hospital. Cemeteries with an approximate date range are indicated by circa (c.). Contains OS data © Crown copyright [and database
right] [2021].
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.g001
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
• Most of the assemblages included were selected because they were drawn from cemeteries of
a substantial size (greater than 100 individuals) and likely reflected the average demographic
for the period and region.
• If assemblages from approximately the same geographic region were available in the medie-
val, early post-medieval and industrial periods these assemblages were prioritised.
• The assemblage had to be available for examination within a suitable timeframe for data col-
lection to be completed (September 2017 to September 2019).
• At least five individuals within the assemblage had to satisfy the individual selection criteria
below. Larger assemblages were prioritised to increase the likelihood that this condition
would be met.
Background information on the cemeteries
Many of the individuals examined dating to the medieval period were derived from lay ceme-
teries. The cemetery of All Saint’s Church, Fishergate, was situated south of the medieval city
walls of York on the east side of the River Foss. The occupants of the cemetery were likely civil-
ians drawn from a range of socioeconomic groups. It was likely established in the late 11th cen-
tury and fell out of use shortly after 1585 CE [53]. The skeletons examined from Hereford
Cathedral were derived from the excavation of the area west of the Bishop’s Cloister. Most
burials were probably interred from the 12th to the 16th centuries. The cemetery area might be
associated with the parish of St John. St John’s parish lacked a parish church but included
Table 1. Table showing the assemblages included in the current study and giving details of their locations, size, date and the number of individuals from this collec-
tion that satisfied the inclusion criteria. Individuals from cemeteries dating from 1100–1700 CE formed the pre-industrial group and those from cemeteries dating from
1700–1900 CE formed the industrial group.
Collection Location of
Collection
Dates Cemetery in
Use (CE)
Number Suitable/
Number of
Individuals in
Collection
Type of Group Publications in
which Assemblage
is described
St Michael’s Litten, Chichester (Late) UCL c. 1700–1900 26/300 Urban [49]
St Bride’s Church, Fleet Street St Bride’s
Church
1714–1848 31/227 Urban parish burial
ground
[50]
The Church of St Hilda, Coronation
Street, South Shields
University of
Sheffield
1816–1856 25/114 Urban working-class
group; ship builders
[51]
St Peter’s Wolverhampton University of
Bradford
1800–1853 18/150 Urban; short burial
period
[52]
Industrial Group Total 103
St Michael’s Litten, Chichester (Early) UCL c. 1550–1700 18/300 Urban [49]
All Saint’s Church, Fishergate, York University of
Sheffield
c. 1100–1500 32/547 Lay cemetery [53]
Hereford Cathedral University of
Bradford
c. 1100–1600 42/1200 Lay cemetery
including two large
plague pits
[54]
Box Lane University of
Bradford
c. 1100–1500 7/88 Lay Cemetery [55]
Blackfriars University of
Bradford
1246–1539 9/192 Friary [56]
St James and St Mary
Magdalene, Chichester, West Sussex
University of
Bradford
c. 1100–1600 24/374 Leprosarium and alms
house
[57]
Pre-Industrial Group Total 130
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t001
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
small parcels of land across the city, including the city centre. As a result, the burial area would
represent all social classes drawn from across the city [54].
Other medieval cemetery assemblages assessed also included monastic burials. The ceme-
tery at Box Lane, Pontefract was likely associated with St John’s Priory, which was founded in
about 1090 CE. Pottery recovered supports burial dates from the 13th to the 14th century. It is
uncertain whether the cemetery served the Cluniac monks themselves or the lay population of
the monastery and the community of nearby settlements. The cemetery included both women
and men, with relatively few children, infants and adolescents, supporting the latter interpreta-
tion. Burials were modest and bodies were likely placed in shrouds without the use of coffins
[55]. The assemblage from Blackfriars, Gloucester was associated with the Dominican Friary
established in 1239 CE. The Blackfriars were known for the relative poverty of their lifestyles
[58]. The burials included the friars themselves, including a priest with his pewter chalice and
paten, in addition to women and high numbers of infants and children. This suggests that ben-
efactors to the Friary and their families were also interred in the burial ground. Furthermore,
it is possible that the friars may have operated a hospital at least until the late 15th century and
hospital patients may have been buried at the Friary [56].
A subset of the medieval material analysed was associated with the medieval leprosarium
and later post-medieval almshouse of St James and St Mary Magdalene, Chichester, likely
dated from the 12th to the 17th centuries. Individuals with leprosy and males were concentrated
in the southwestern portion of the excavation area whilst females, subadults and non-leprous
individuals became more frequent in the northern area of the site. It has been proposed that
the earliest portion of the cemetery is the southwestern portion where the prevalence of leprosy
is greatest [57].
The industrial group was similarly drawn from a wide socioeconomic spectrum and
included London, Chichester and the more northerly industrial centres of Wolverhampton
and South Shields. The Litten cemetery, encountered during the excavation of Eastgate square,
Chichester, was estimated to have been in use from 1100–1850 CE. Although, most burials
date from the 17th-19th centuries. This cemetery likely represented a broad cross-section of
the socioeconomic groups present at Chichester and could be divided between the pre-indus-
trial and industrial groups in the current research using burial type [49]. The earlier burials
within this cemetery were likely contemporaneous with those inhumed at the leprosarium of
St James and St Mary Magdalene, Chichester [59]. The material from St. Bride’s church Lon-
don were derived from within the church and they were accompanied by lead coffin plates giv-
ing name, age and date of death. The first individual was born in 1696 CE and the last in 1852
CE. A large proportion of the individuals interred at St Bride’s were likely workers involved in
trade and crafts along the Thames, but burial records indicate that the status of the individuals
interred varied greatly, ranging from the lord mayor to individuals in poverty. Qualification
for burial at St Bride’s church may have principally depended on location rather than social
status [50]. The assemblage from Coronation Street, South Shields, was associated with the
Church of St Hilda and dated from 1816–1860 CE. Most of the individuals were interred in
less expensive mass-produced coffins indicating that they were probably working class. Vari-
ability in coffin furniture and burial situation suggested the cemetery group occupied a rela-
tively wide range of financial statuses. The richer burials at the site were less ornate, however,
than most other contemporary middle- and upper-class crypts [51]. The assemblage derived
from the excavation of the 19th century overflow burial ground for St Peter’s Collegiate
Church, Wolverhampton, was dated to 1830–1880 CE based on the style of coffin fittings. This
corresponded to a period of rapid urban growth in Wolverhampton as it developed as a
manufacturing centre. Many people were involved in ironmaking and other workshop activi-
ties [52].
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
The skeletal assemblages examined were drawn from a range of geographic locations and
social backgrounds within England. Consequently, post-hoc pairwise testing was performed to
determine whether any differences observed between the two groups were particularly driven
by any of the assemblages examined. These factors are explored further in [60].
Selection of specimens and sample demography
Second lower molars were selected for OFA as it has been shown to provide an effective repre-
sentation of masticatory behaviours in primates [61]. OFA can only be effectively applied to
moderately worn teeth because dental wear facet patterns are obliterated at more advanced
stages of wear [39]. Unworn teeth are similarly uninformative. Thus, lower second molars had
to show wear corresponding to Smith score 3 [62] (moderate cusp removal with or without a
maximum of pin-point dentine exposure).
Individuals were prioritised if they had relatively good representation of the dentition, pref-
erably with some representation of both the upper and lower dental arcades. The best-pre-
served side was chosen and in cases of an equivalent state of preservation the right side was
analysed. Dental pathology, including ante-mortem tooth loss and dental caries, was present
in many of the dentitions examined. Carious lesions were marked as present if a cavity involv-
ing the crown was observed on the tooth. The impact of these confounding factors (sidedness,
carious lesions, ante-mortem tooth loss) was previously assessed [60] and considered negligi-
ble for the current study.
Individuals for whom sex and age-at-death estimates could be made were also prioritised.
Sex was estimated by assessing the morphology of the pubic bone, cranium and greater sciatic
notch of the innominate bone [63, 64]. The assemblages in both periods were comprised of a
mixture of males and females (Table 2). Age-at-death was estimated entirely from the skeleton,
in order to make it independent from the development of the dentition. It was based on an
assessment of degenerative changes in the auricular surface of the ilium [65]. This method was
selected because the pubic symphysis was commonly absent or poorly preserved. The pre-
industrial group was dominated by a larger number of individuals from the younger age-at-
death category (Buckberry-Chamberlain score�9)(Table 3). Sex and age-at-death were also
assessed as factors which may have contributed to the variability in wear facet patterns
observed.
To conduct dynamic OFA analysis, one individual was selected from the pre-industrial
group and one from the industrial group to simulate power stroke kinematics. Individuals
Table 2. Sex distribution of the individuals selected from the assemblages examined and used to perform OFA.
Site Indeterminate Female Male
York Barbican 17 8 7
Blackfriars, Gloucester 4 2 3
Box Lane, Pontefract 4 3 0
St James and St Mary Magdalene, Chichester 3 13 8
Hereford Cathedral 16 14 12
Medieval Summary 44 40 30
Coronation Street, South Shields 7 6 12
St Michael’s Litten, Chichester 0 19 27
St Bride’s, London 0 13 18
St Peter’s, Wolverhampton 5 5 8
Industrial Summary 12 43 65
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t002
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
were selected with adequate preservation of the upper and lower tooth rows and who pre-
sented lower second molar wear facet patterns characteristic of each period; their wear facet
area proportions approximated the centre values for either the pre-industrial or industrial
group. 3D models of antagonistic upper and lower molar rows were required and generated
using the methods outlined below.
Generation of occlusal models
A dental gypsum model of one of the lower second molars was produced for each individual. The
reflective and lustrous qualities of the enamel rendered the direct generation of 3D models from
the original dental surfaces problematic [66], therefore dental impressions were taken. The molar
row was first gently cleaned using acetone prior to an impression being taken. An impression of
each lower second molar was taken using a two-phase, two-step, putty-wash technique utilising
President1 putty soft and President1 light body polyvinylsiloxane impression materials
(Coltène/Whaledent Inc) [67–69]. Dental casts were made using non-reflective dental die stone
(Suprastone1 dental die stone type IV; Kerr Corporation). Virtual dental models were generated
using a structured light scanning system (GOM ATOS 80 scanner, GOM, Braunschweig, Ger-
many). Data acquired was imported directly into ATOS professional (v 2018 Hotfix 3) and then
converted into a polygonal surface mesh, which could be exported in stl format for analysis.
Occlusal fingerprint analysis
Wear facet analysis was performed using GOM Inspect (Version 2018 Hotfix 6) based on the
method of Kullmer et al. [48] (Fig 2). The teeth were consistently orientated in the software
using a gaussian best-fit plane attached to the cervical margin of the tooth [48, 70]. This was cre-
ated by drawing a curve around the cervix of the tooth and selecting an area 0.2mm above and
below the curve. Wear facets on the occlusal surface of each lower second molar were identified,
demarcated and labelled using the terminology of Maier and Schneck [71, 72], modified after
Kullmer et al. [48]. The area and inclination of each wear facet was measured and grouped
according to the phase of the power stroke sequence with which it was associated, either phase I
(divided into buccal phase I and lingual phase I facets) or phase II. Larger teeth at a similar stage
of wear will typically exhibit larger wear facets than smaller teeth. The area associated with each
Table 3. Age-at-Death distribution using the Buckberry-Chamberlain method (2002) of the individuals selected from the assemblages examined and used to per-
form OFA.
Age Category Unknown Younger Older
Buckberry-Chamberlain score - �9�10
Site
York Barbican 3 25 4
Blackfriars, Gloucester 1 8 0
Box Lane, Pontefract 2 5 0
St James, Chichester 0 24 0
Hereford Cathedral 13 28 1
Medieval Summary 19 90 5
Coronation Street, South Shields 3 11 11
St Michael’s Litten, Chichester 1 35 10
St Bride’s, London 0 15 16
St Peter’s, Wolverhampton 6 7 5
Industrial Summary 10 68 42
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t003
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAy-Dz8eGy8iot8vZrdvxzbGbt8F6OXimibrZPXYafJQ9oIU6U9JwafWGWHPbiNkZjnqW5x9SMnoCEKBLZKfSQ5C2IE1a9dUJ5k__ZqxDPiZ0gJ8H_aj4sfDYAKk8TQSO--s7znr=w802-h994-v0
aspect of the power stroke, therefore, was expressed as a proportion of the total area of the wear
facets across the occlusal surface. Wear facet inclination was measured in relation to the best-fit
plane fitted to a curve drawn around the cervical margin of the tooth. This measurement is
called the dip angle. Tip crushing areas, flat subcircular areas of wear on the cusp tips, have pre-
viously been attributed to the crushing action of the cusp tips in the opposing basins of the
antagonistic teeth during puncture-crushing cycles [36, 39, 40]. These wear areas were, there-
fore, not considered in the current analysis which is concerned with wear facets primarily cre-
ated with an inclination, indicating a horizontal directional component of jaw movement,
during the power stroke. More details about conducting OFA are given in S1 Text.
Differences in wear facet area composition were visualised using a ternary plot. A ternary
plot is a diagram that displays three variables which sum to a constant (1 or 100%). Each axis
corresponds to one of the three variables that form the composition (buccal phase I, lingual
phase I and phase II facet areas). Observations are plotted within the equilateral triangle
formed by the three axes. The ratio of the three variables for a given observation are graphically
displayed based on the position of the plotted point within the triangle and the proximity of
the point to the apex associated with that element of the composition. Ternary diagrams were
produced in R statistical software (v.3.6.1) using the package ‘compositions’.
In addition, the occlusal relief index (ORI) was calculated for each lower second molar,
which provides a measure of the complexity and steepness of occlusal topography [70, 73, 74].
This value was calculated by dividing the 3D area of the occlusal topography above the level of
the central fossa by the 2D area of the molar crown at the deepest point of the central fossa
(Fig 3). The ORI values were compared between the industrial era and the medieval and early
post-medieval periods using an independent sample t-test.
Fig 2. Process of conducting occlusal fingerprint analysis in GOM Inspect. A) Process used to create the reference
plane through the cervix of the tooth. B) Correct alignment of a lower left molar using the cervical reference plane and
mesio-distal axis of the tooth. C) A tooth with the wear facets demarcated using surface curves and colored according
to their functional role during the power stroke: blue indicates buccal phase I, orange corresponds to lingual phase I,
green to phase II and brown is a tip crushing area. The orientation of the tooth is the same as in diagram B. D)
Illustration of how dip angle was calculated. The angle between a best-fit plane fitted to the wear facet and the cervical
reference plane was measured to give the dip angle.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.g002
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxGrppO6jefVeuPTVhnc4u-EEV3zJ9U_4Gx17XVBEbdv1itkaYjLy0MmCqWGu1Tu8RBmRG3Oz9YFaxMMvo39XnFX6FKAb3WJqNKjSjOooW8SfZjsBDxJHw_RIzLtJDvL5cu1XAHYQ=w1280-h945-v0
Kinematic simulations of the power stroke were conducted using the Occlusal Fingerprint
Analyser software package developed by DFG Research Unit 771 (freely available at https://
www.for771.uni-bonn.de/for771-en/ofa) on one individual from the medieval and early post-
medieval periods and one from the industrial period. It provides a complementary approach
to the static analysis of the molar wear pattern by indicating the directions of occlusal move-
ments involved in wear facet development. The software enables the simulation of the occlusal
phase of the power stroke between antagonistic teeth and can be used to infer the kinematic
relationship between sets of wear facets. The user can set a trajectory pathway for the lower
teeth which approximates their movement during the power stroke. The software detects colli-
sions between the teeth as they come into contact and are deflected along the surface relief of
each other. Contact areas can be recorded and assessed as they develop during the power
stroke enabling comparisons to be made between individuals, groups and taxa. For further
details on the operation of the Occlusal Fingerprint Analyser software refer to Kullmer et al. [30]. The OFA software data of these two individuals, alongside the data extracted from the
Fig 3. Process for calculating ORI using GOM Inspect. A) The cervical reference plane (green) is translated along the z-axis to the deepest point of the
occlusal surface (red). This is typically the deepest point of the central fossa. B) The polygonal model is then cut at the level of the occlusal plane. C)The 2D area
of the tooth is measured at the level of the occlusal plane. D) The 3D occlusal area is measured from the level of the occlusal plane. The occlusal relief index
(ORI) is the area of D divided by the area of C.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.g003
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
wear facet patterns of the lower second molars of the whole sample, led to the development of
theoretical models of power stroke behaviours for the pre-industrial and industrial groups.
Statistical analyses
Wear facet composition in the two study groups was explored statistically using the methods
developed by Aitchison [75] and implemented by Boogaart and Tolosana-Delgado [76] to
overcome the issues with applying conventional statistical approaches to compositional data
i.e. data in which each set of observations sum to 100%. Consequently, the data was subject to
an isometric-log ratio transformation prior to further statistical analysis [77]. The isometric-
log transformed data did not fulfil the assumption of multivariate normality, therefore, wear
facet proportions in the industrial and pre-industrial groups were assessed using Permuta-
tional-MANOVA (PERMANOVA) applied to the Euclidean distance matrix of the data [78,
79]. The test compares the F-statistic generated using the data divided into pre-industrial and
industrial groups with F-statistics values obtained by randomly exchanging observations
between the two study groups (a permutation value of 9999 was selected). If there were no dif-
ferences between the groups, the recorded observations would be exchangeable between the
two groups without impacting the F-statistic value generated; the F-statistic generated using
the actual data split between the two study groups would fall within the range of F-statistic val-
ues generated using the random permutations of the data. Statistical analysis was performed
using the packages ‘RVAideMemoire 0.9–66’ and ‘compositions’ in R statistical software (refer
to S1 Text for code used). The PERMANOVA procedure outlined above was also used to test
the effect of age-at-death and sex on wear facet expression in the two groups.
The mean dip angle for each wear facet type (buccal phase I, lingual phase I and phase II) was
calculated for each lower second molar examined. Wear facet dip angle values satisfied the
assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variance (Shapiro-Wilk test p>0.05;Levene’s Test
p>0.05),therefore, differences in dip angle inclination between the two human groups were
tested using the independent sample t-tests. Independent sample t-tests were also used to deter-
mine the effect of sex and age-at-death on wear facet dip angle in each of the human groups.
Results
Static OFA
The wear facet area composition in the molars differs significantly between the two groups
(Permutational Multivariate analysis of variance p<0.05;Fig 4 and Table 4). In the medieval
and early post-medieval group, buccal phase I and lingual phase I wear facet areas occupy a
larger proportion of the total wear facet area than phase II wear facets (mean composition:
buccal phase I 30.88%, lingual phase I 39.84% and phase II 29.27%). The industrial assemblages
possess greater proportions of phase II wear as a consequence of reduced phase I wear regions
(Mean: buccal phase I 26.25%, lingual phase I 34.05% and phase II 39.69%) (Fig 3). The vari-
ance in dental wear facet area proportions does not differ significantly between the two periods
(Permutational homogeneity of multivariate dispersion test p>0.05;Table 5; Standard Devia-
tion: industrial period = 0.45; medieval and early post-medieval Period = 0.40).
No significant differences were found in wear facet area composition between the cemetery
assemblages within the pre-industrial and industrial groups following post-hoc analysis
(Table 6). When comparing the industrial and pre-industrial cemetery assemblages, a signifi-
cant difference was apparent between the Hereford Cathedral assemblage and the industrial-
era St Bride’s and St Michael’s Litten material. The St. Bride’s material also differed signifi-
cantly from the York Barbican, Box Lane and St James’ leprosarium assemblages. The
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxvaGH-0odLnohZTHd7u2xn-EUCJYB-Z4uafzAWECoBJ2lJnGuAh8R-EpvfyhfGkfyL6cjmXvw611r2ro-XdRvQOUP5DJ-B2Mv_MMGShMpgsBCoMOfaEPsPN5YEqFSTkqQhesYtzw=w1280-h577-v0
industrial portion of the St Michael’s Litten, Chichester, assemblage differed significantly from
the York Barbican, Box Lane and St James’ leprosarium, Chichester, material.
Wear facet dip angles of the lower second molar also differ significantly between the pre-
industrial and industrial groups. Buccal phase I and lingual phase I mean dip angles are signifi-
cantly steeper in the industrial assemblages (Independent sample t-test p<0.05;Fig 5 and
Table 7). Phase II wear facets are as expected also more steeply inclined in the industrial
period. This difference approached significance; however, the null hypothesis could not be
rejected for phase II dip angles as the 95% confidence interval includes the p-value (Table 7).
Significantly greater occlusal relief index (ORI) values were observed in the lower second
molars of individuals dating to the industrial period (Independent sample t-test p<0.05;Fig 5
and Table 8). This indicates that higher relief and topographic complexity across the occlusal
surface characterise the industrial group.
Fig 4. Comparison of dental wear facet patterns between the pre-industrial and industrial groups. Above: Comparison of lower second molar dental wear facet
patterns between the medieval and early post-medieval Periods and the industrial Period. Wear facets are marked as follows: buccal phase I facets are blue, lingual phase
I facets are red, phase II facets are green and tip crushing areas are orange. Note large phase II wear facets in the industrial period relative to buccal phase I wear. In the
earlier periods, lingual phase I wear facets and buccal phase I facets occupy a larger proportion of the overall wear facet area. Below: Ternary plot showing the
relationship between period and relative wear facet area of the lower second molar (composed of buccal phase I (BPI), lingual phase I (LPI) and phase II (PII) facet
areas). The industrial group is displayed as dark grey circles and the medieval and early post-medieval group as light grey circles. The centre value for each period is
represented as a larger filled shape surrounded by 95% confidence regions. The industrial group is represented by a large black circle and the medieval group a white
circle.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.g004
Table 4. Results of the one-way permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) assessment of the relationship between period and lower second
molar wear facet area composition. The dependent variables being tested are buccal phase I, lingual phase I and phase II wear facet area and the independent variable is
the two modern human groups (either pre-industrial or industrial).
Factor Degrees of Freedom Sum of Squares Mean of Squares F-model R2 p-value Null Hypothesis
pre-Industrial vs Industrial 1 8.56 8.56 19.46 0.08 0.0001 Rejected
Residuals 231 101.62 0.44 0.92
Totals 232 110.19 1.00
Permutation value was set at 9999. Null hypothesis: Wear facet area composition did not significantly differ between the pre-industrial and industrial groups.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t004
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
The data was normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk test W = 0.99, p = 0.08) and homogeneity
of variance could be assumed (Levene’s test F value = 1.72, p = 0.19). Null hypothesis: ORI did
not differ significantly between the two periods.
Wear facet expression was not found to differ significantly between males and females in
either the pre-industrial or industrial group (S1–S4 Tables in S1 Text).
Age-at-death category had a significant effect upon wear facet composition in the industrial
group. The associated R2 was of a smaller magnitude than that obtained when examining the
period-based influence on wear facet area composition, however (0.05 and 0.09, respectively)
(Table 9). The older age-at-death group had larger proportions of Lingual Phase I wear facets
and smaller proportions of Buccal Phase I and Phase II wear when compared to the younger
age-at-death category. The centre values for the younger age category were BPI 28.69%, LPI
31.13% and PII 40.17%. Centre values for the older age category were BPI 21.84%, LPI 42.21%
and PII 35.95%. Age-at-death could not be explored in the pre-industrial assemblage as the
older age-at-death category was poorly represented in the material examined.
BPI dip angles were significantly less steep in the older age-at-death category (Table 10).
LPI and PII wear facets were slightly more shallowly inclined in the older age-at-death cate-
gory. The effect size of age-at-death on BPI wear facet dip angle was of a smaller magnitude
than the effect size associated with period (maximum -0.50 and 0.84, respectively).
Dynamic OFA
The molars in the pre-industrial group performed a greater lateral displacement during phase I of
the power stroke resulting in a more gradual increase in crown contact area relative to the indus-
trial period (Fig 6 and S1 and S2 Videos). The phase II movement of the pre-industrial individual
took place over an enlarged time segment and involved greater medial displacement of the lower
Table 5. Results of permutational test assessing homogeneity of multivariate dispersions for comparison of wear facet area composition between the pre-industrial
and industrial groups.
Degrees of Freedom Sum of Squares Mean of Squares F-model p-value Null Hypothesis
Pre-Industrial vs. Industrial Group 1 0.23 0.23 1.63 0.21 Not Rejected
Residuals 231 33.24 0.14
Null hypothesis: within group variation did not differ significantly between the two periods. The null hypothesis of homogeneity of dispersion is supported by p>0.05.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t005
Table 6. Results of post-hoc pairwise comparison using permutational MANOVA of wear facet area between the skeletal assemblages examined.
York Blackfriars Box Lane St James,
Chichester
Coronation
Street
St Michael’s Litten
(pre-industrial)
St Michael’s Litten
(industrial)
Hereford
Cathedral
St
Bride’s
Blackfriars 0.09 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Box Lane 0.28 0.09 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
St James, Chichester 0.84 0.10 0.11 NA NA NA NA NA NA
Coronation Street 0.09 0.84 0.10 0.11 NA NA NA NA NA
St Michael’s Litten
(pre-industrial
0.10 0.84 0.06 0.12 0.89 NA NA NA NA
St Michael’s Litten
(industrial
0.00 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.09 NA NA NA
Hereford Cathedral 0.61 0.28 0.61 0.89 0.11 0.28 0.00 NA NA
St Bride’s 0.00 0.30 0.00 0.00 0.61 0.28 0.28 0.00 NA
St Peter’s 0.09 0.54 0.02 0.09 0.89 0.77 0.21 0.13 0.61
Permutation value was set at 9999.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t006
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwxq1yvKp_Bh9nhY-51sYqEfF7jVWSw8wIcovEB1JAHULpkSNbQTwGOunjDZYMzZ0Q92v9q8YVb798LyvQo1W88BllJJVX2x2LnQRVfMv0pqE8lsynZeifoHGGPA7sZ-MrrVR9yqQ=w979-h1280-v0
molars when compared to the industrial individual. The industrial-era individual was character-
ised overall by smaller and steeper antagonistic contact areas between molars during a shortened
power stroke sequence when compared to the individual from the pre-industrial group.
Discussion
Dental macrowear patterns in the medieval and early post-medieval
periods and the Industrial Revolution
The study aimed to assess whether the dental occlusal pattern typical of individuals from the
Industrial Revolution indicated changes in the occlusal power stroke when compared to their
Fig 5. Comparison of dip angle and ORI between the pre-industrial and industrial group. Upper row and lower
left: Plots comparing mean dip angle value for the lower second molars for buccal phase I, lingual phase I and phase II
facets between the medieval and early post-medieval periods and the industrial period. The means are represented by
black squares alongside error bars giving 95% confidence intervals. Grey dots visualise the dip angle value for each of
the lower second molars assessed using OFA. Lower right: Plot comparing mean Occlusal Relief Index values for the
lower second molars between the two periods (black squares with 95% confidence intervals). Grey dots visualise each
individual ORI value for the lower second molar targeted by OFA.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.g005
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
medieval antecedents. This was framed in terms of the dietary changes that took place during
the Industrial Revolution, which were inferred from archaeological, historical and bioarchaeo-
logical evidence. Nine British cemetery assemblages were included and compared. Evidence
for changes in the power stroke were inferred from the dental wear facet patterns of the lower
second molars using OFA. Significant differences were found between the dental wear facet
patterns of individuals dating from the industrial era and those from the medieval and early
post-medieval periods.
The dental macrowear patterns of the lower second molars of the pre-industrial group are
characterised by significantly greater proportions of buccal phase I and lingual phase I wear
when compared to the industrial group. This indicates differences in chewing behaviours
between the two groups. A greater transverse jaw movement has been associated with the
enlargement of lingual phase I wear facet areas in some modern hunter-gatherers [40]. This
included groups, such as the Khoe-San and Australian Aborigines, who were more reliant on
Table 7. Result of independent sample t-tests comparing mean dip angles of the wear facets of the lower second
molar between the industrial and pre-industrial groups.
Power Stroke Phase Buccal Phase I Lingual Phase I Phase II
Industrial Mean Dip Angle(˚) 29.81 30.58 25.79
Industrial Standard Deviation 9.59 7.22 8.08
Medieval Mean Dip Angle (˚) 22.79 23.08 23.71
Medieval Standard Deviation 7.18 7.35 6.72
t-value 6.19 7.8 2.09
Degrees of Freedom 183.97 220.69 195.23
p valuea <0.001<0.0010.038
Effect Size 0.84 1.03 0.28
95% CI Effect Size 0.57 to 1.11 0.75 to 1.30 0.02 to 0.55
Statistical Power 1.00 1.00 0.85
Null Hypothesis Rejected Rejected Not Rejected
a Bonferroni adjusted p-value for 3 tests = 0.017.
Dip angle data was normally distributed (Shapiro Wilk test BPI p-value = 0.29; LPI p-value = 0.15; PII p-
value = 0.64). Null hypothesis: The dip angle values for the wear facets associated with a given phase of the power
stroke did not differ significantly between the two periods.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t007
Table 8. Result of independent sample t-test examining the effect of period on Occlusal Relief Index (ORI) of the
lower second molar.
Industrial Mean Occlusal Relief Index 1.57
Standard Deviation 0.14
Medieval Mean Occlusal Relief Index 1.48
Standard Deviation 0.12
t-value 5.48
Degrees of Freedom 206.12
p-value <0.0001
Effect size 0.73
95% CI effect size 0.46 to 1.00
Statistical power 1.00
Null Hypothesis Rejected
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t008
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
hard and abrasive food stuffs, such as seeds, but also tough plant parts [38, 40]. Larger buccal
phase I wear facet areas in the pre-industrial group are consistent with a prominent and pro-
longed shearing action during the incursive portion of the masticatory stroke [36, 40]. In con-
trast, industrial individuals frequently exhibit more poorly developed phase I wear facets
alongside wear facet patterns dominated by phase II wear. This occlusal situation reflects a
briefer and more vertically directed phase I shearing action, such as designated by small and
steep wear facets, and consistent with the consumption of less abrasive and softer food items
that do not require extensive transverse jaw movements during oral processing [39, 80–82].
Similarly, the OFA kinematic simulations for each period further indicate a reduction in lateral
travel of the lower teeth during the power stroke in the industrial period. Previously assumed
differences in the physical properties of the dietary staples consumed in each period are con-
firmed by the differences in dental wear facet patterns observed in the current study [14].
The variance in dental wear facet patterns did not differ significantly between the two peri-
ods. Nevertheless, variance values are relatively large in both. This might derive from the inclu-
sion of individuals of both higher and lower social status within the pre-industrial and
industrial samples. In the medieval period, the quality and type of bread consumed varied
between social classes. The upper classes ate fine wheaten bread while the lower classes would
consume darker and coarser loaves of rye, barley and oats [43]. For the peasantry, dietary sup-
plements, such as meat, would have formed as little as 20% of the total calories consumed. This
Table 9. Results of Type I PERMANOVA assessing the relationship between age-at-death category (either younger or older) and wear facet area composition in the
industrial material.
Df Sum of Squares Mean of Squares F-model R2 p-value H0
Age-at-death Category 1 2.23 2.23 3.76 0.06 0.027 Rejected
Residuals 57 33.80 0.59 0.94
Total 58 36.03 1.00
Null hypothesis: wear facet area composition did not differ significantly between the younger and older age-at-death categories dating to the industrial period.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t009
Table 10. Independent sample t-tests assessing age-related differences in dip angle during the industrial period
for BPI, LPI and PII wear facets.
Wear Facet Function BPI LPI PII
Younger Mean (˚) 31.38 31.52 26.94
Standard Deviation 8.34 7.52 8.09
Older Mean (˚) 26.78 28.92 24.8
Standard Deviation 9.76 6.8 8.86
t-value -2.31 -1.75 -1.18
Degrees of Freedom 73.39 82.27 68.01
p value�0.02 0.08 0.24
Effect Size -0.5 -0.36 -0.26
95% CI Effect Size -0.92 to-0.07 -0.78 to -0.6 -0.68 to 0.16
Statistical Power 0.63 0.38 0.22
H0 Rejected? Not Rejected Not Rejected
�Bonferroniadjusted p-value = 0.017. The data for each variable was normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk p>0.05)
and exhibited homogeneity of variance (Levene’s test p>0.05).Null hypothesis: dip angle values did not differ
significantly between younger and older age-at-death categories during the industrial period for each of the wear
facet types assessed.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.t010
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAzRdBb_oIL_00diLB3iNXotUmJpbShjNvH3qZzmbm5Fcs18H8VG_Ofwe0verKdOCfQW5UjzzMY2iiNe8mszHtpZDJ0AWJ4QTjEiXXUBhwsAmF0sqb-r75MVx5NCHk9ykAwFgoqiKw=w1280-h1005-v0
was limited to salted meat and bacon, which were more readily available in the autumn once
livestock were fattened otherwise dairy products acted as the ‘white meat’ of the poor [83]. In
contrast, the diets of the upper classes were supplemented daily by either meat or fish. [84]. In
the industrial period, the quantity of meat eaten remained a crucial indicator of social status
with the poorest subsisting on only bread, cheese and potatoes [46]. The middle and upper
classes would often consume meat daily [7]. The contextual information available for most of
the skeletal assemblages examined was not adequate to determine whether social status influ-
enced the variability in the dental wear facet patterns observed in either period. Adequate con-
textual information pertaining to social status was available, however, for the St Michael’s
Litten and St Bride’s assemblages. The relationship between social status and dental wear pat-
terns in these assemblages has been considered in Silvester [60].
The increasingly steep wear facets and greater occlusal relief in the molars of the industrial
group reflects a reduction in the transverse component of the masticatory stroke as well as a
reduction in abrasive particles within the food eaten [38, 62, 85]. This is consistent with the
inferences made using the wear facet area data. The steeper inclination of dip angles in the
industrial period points to a reduction in the demands placed on the masticatory system as die-
tary content became less hard, but also less tough, as a consequence of more intensive food
processing. Similarly, Smith [62] argued that more oblique wear in agriculturalist groups
Fig 6. Development of contact areas during power stroke simulations and proposed chewing models. Left: Stacked
bar charts comparing the development of wear facet areas for power stroke simulations conducted using the Occlusal
Fingerprint Analyser software package. Each collision is broken down into a series of timesteps in which the lower
tooth model attempted to move 0.05mm towards the next point along the estimated power stroke movement
trajectory. The software calculates any collisions that occur between the opposing teeth at each time step. One
individual was selected from the medieval period (SK2033 from York Barbican) and one individual from the industrial
period (SK1010 from Coronation Street). The medieval individual showed an extended power stroke relative to the
industrial individual and a more clearly defined and extended period of exclusively phase II contacts. Right:
Visualisation of the hypothesized differences between the chewing cycles of individuals from the industrial and pre-
industrial group.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261404.g006
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
relative to hunter-gatherers was closely associated with their consumption of more heavily
processed and cooked grains. In addition, clinical feeding studies have found that tougher
foods are more frequently chewed with a larger lateral component of jaw movement, whereas,
soft food, such as modern bread, are characterised by slim drop shaped movements often with
a greater vertical amplitude, when jaw movement is viewed in the frontal plane [86–88]. It can
be hypothesized, therefore, that the extended lateral shift that characterised the chewing action
of the pre-industrial group resulted in greater flattening of the occlusal relief which was further
accelerated by the inclusion of greater quantities of abrasive material within the diet. Further
shifts in food processing technology have resulted in the retention of virtually unworn teeth
late into life among many industrialised groups in the 21st century [3, 89–91].
Additional factors that may have influenced wear facet expression and
limitations of the current study
No significant differences in dental wear facet expression were found between the sexes in the
industrial period. The bulk of the dietary staples consumed in the 18th-19th centuries would
have been consistent between the sexes. Both sexes would have derived most of their calories
from bread, potatoes, vegetables and sweetened tea. Men, within a lower-class urban setting,
however, would receive the majority of meat that could be afforded. Even so, the quantity
would likely be meagre and would therefore be less likely to impact habitual masticatory
behaviours [7, 43, 92]. Similarly, historical accounts indicate that sexual differences in the diets
consumed in the medieval and early post-medieval periods were typically limited to supple-
mentary items [84].
In the industrial period, individuals estimated to be older exhibited slightly greater propor-
tions of lingual phase I wear. Clinical research into the effect of ageing on chewing cycles have
found that older individuals still retain the capacity to adapt to changing food properties,
including food hardness [93–96]. In addition, there was little historical evidence to support
dramatic shifts in the physical properties of the foods eaten in advanced age in either period
[7, 8, 97]. Consequently, largely consistent responses in masticatory parameters would be
anticipated to the softer and more heavily processed foodstuffs consumed in the industrial
period irrespective of age. A smaller R2 value was associated with the differences in wear facet
proportions between age-at-death categories in the industrial period when compared to the R2
value associated with the differences in wear facet proportions between the two periods (Tables
4 and 9). As a result, the different age distributions of the pre-industrial and industrial groups
compared should not have markedly impacted the results of the overall comparison between
the pre-industrial and industrial groups.
The older portion of the industrial assemblage typically exhibited greater cusp reduction
and less obliquely inclined phase I wear facets. As wear advances with increasing age, further
modification of the power stroke is predicted in order to maintain functional masticatory effi-
ciency as occlusal topography provides less of a guiding function [37, 98]. An increase in the
lateral portion of the power stroke might be anticipated with increased age based on observa-
tions of modern hunter-gatherers with extremely advanced tooth wear [3], but, a broader
range of occlusal wear stages and skeletal age-at-death categories would be required to test this
hypothesis further.
The individuals examined in the current research only represented a small cross-section of
the potential age-at-death ranges within each assemblage due to the restrictive selection crite-
ria required for the performance of wear facet analysis. OFA can only be effectively applied to
lightly worn teeth [39, 48] and is largely inappropriate for the analysis of wear following the
obliteration of dental wear facets after which only an assessment of the overall inclination of
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
the wear plane of the tooth can be made. Faster wear rates meant that only relatively young
individuals could be included from the medieval and early post-medieval periods, to ensure
that wear stages of the lower second molars were comparable between the two periods. For
this reason, the influence of age-at-death on wear expression could not be assessed in the pre-
industrial group.
The current project focused on the occlusal wear facet pattern of the lower second molar.
This decision was driven by work on primates, which has found that the lower second molar
provides an effective representation of masticatory function within one species [62, 99]. In
addition, the first molars were more commonly lost ante-mortem in the assemblages exam-
ined, particularly those dating to the industrial period. Wear facet expression has been previ-
ously shown to differ significantly between the first and second molars in modern hunter-
gatherers [100]. This is likely due to functional differences between the molars from anterior
to posterior, which relate to subtle differences in dental morphology and their position and
inclination in relation to the TMJ [101]. Thus, the wear facet data derived from the current
project can only be directly compared with other research examining lower second molars
[e.g., 41].
Wear facet expression may have been influenced by additional confounding factors which
could not be fully considered as they were beyond the scope of the project. The presence of
occlusal variability can modify masticatory patterns and even restrict the pathways of move-
ment of the mandible that are possible during chewing [102]. The inclination of the molar
teeth in the jaws may also influence the size and inclination of the wear facets that develop due
to differences in how the teeth occlude during the power stroke [103]. Bruxism involving the
repetitive grinding and clenching of the teeth can also modify dental wear facet patterns [104].
Tooth wear alone cannot be used to diagnose bruxism within a bioarchaeological context and
an appropriate methodology to do so requires further development [105]. Clinical dental
research links bruxism with psychosocial stress [106]. Dramatic changes did occur in the social
environment during the industrial era [7], but it is difficult to quantify whether levels of psy-
chosocial stress increased relative to the medieval period [107].
The role of phase II wear facets in the power stroke
The large proportion of phase II wear (>40in individuals from the industrial period con-
trast with previous studies that have examined wear facet area proportions in modern hunter-
gatherers and Palaeolithic anatomically modern humans and Neanderthals [38, 40] and the
majority of pre-industrial individuals examined in the current analysis. The role and mode of
formation of phase II wear facets during the power stroke remains debated [108, 109]. In
extant ungulates, large phase II facets have been associated with a more heavily frugivorous
diet [36]. This relationship between increased frugivory and large phase II wear facets was not
apparent in modern hunter-gatherers [40]. Large phase II wear facets may indicate extended
excursive contacts during the power stroke, more consistent with the larger central fossa pres-
ent in great ape lower molars rather than anatomically modern humans [41, 62]. This indicates
that phase II facet areas in industrialising modern humans are likely principally performing a
different role during mastication.
Some authors have associated phase II facets with a grinding function, combining a flat-
angled shearing and crushing action, during phase II of the power stroke [28, 36]. Experimen-
tal observation of bone strain and muscle activity during the power stroke in primates and
dental microwear textures, however, indicated that the forces principally responsible for phase
II facet creation are likely active towards the end of phase I, immediately prior to, and possibly
during, maximum intercuspation [108–110]. Similarly, the peak in contact force also occurred
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
during maximum intercuspation during a finite element analysis simulation involving antago-
nist human first molars and their supporting tissues [111]. A similar pattern of jaw adductor
muscle activity was found in a study of EMG profiles during mastication in modern humans.
Peak muscle activity occurred towards the end of phase I just prior to maximum intercuspa-
tion and declined rapidly during jaw opening [112]. Phase II wear facets were also involved
immediately prior to maximum intercuspation during the power stroke simulations con-
ducted for the current project. As a result, a dramatic increase in wear facet contact area
occurred in the individuals examined during the terminal portion of phase I of the power
stroke (Video 1 and 2). This period of mixed phase I and II contacts corresponds with the peak
in jaw adductor muscle activity described in EMG studies of modern humans and other non-
human primates [109, 111, 112].
In this model of food breakdown during phase I of the power stroke, material is cut initially
along the edges of phase I wear facets. In addition, food particles are compressed against phase
II wear facets, formed along the lingual slopes of the buccal cusps far down into central fossa of
the lower molars, during the terminal part of phase I and during maximum intercuspation,
proximate to or during the peak in jaw adductor muscle force. The extensive development of
phase II wear facets when compared to the size of phase I wear facets in the industrial-era may,
therefore, indicate that food breakdown during the power stroke may principally have
occurred as a result of the crushing action against phase II facets during the terminal part of
phase I.
Conclusions
Dentists often desire predictable and stable outcomes for their patients during and following
treatment [113]. Dental practitioners need to be aware of the functional consequences changes
in food properties have had on the masticatory system and craniofacial development over the
past three centuries. The current research highlights the biomechanical feedback loop that
exists between food properties, chewing behaviours and dental wear. The differences inter-
preted in masticatory power stroke between the pre-industrial and industrial groups in the
current study likely underlay the developments in occlusion and craniofacial morphology that
have been previously reported as a result of the dietary changes that accompanied industriali-
sation [2, 14]. A reduction in the lateral component of jaw movement and chewing duration
during and following the Industrial Revolution due to the consumption of an increasingly soft
diet diminished the demands placed on the craniofacial complex during mastication [3, 15,
16]. This may fail to promote craniofacial growth and development to the extent that the hard
and tough ancestral diet of humans did resulting in changes in jaw morphology [14, 114, 115]
and lead to an increase in malocclusion over time [1, 2]. The changes seen in the industrial era
sample in this study reflect the impact of the early stages of the industrialisation of diet on
occlusal wear patterns and chewing kinematics, and may reflect the beginning of contempo-
rary dental behaviours.
As food properties are modified further in the future by both technological changes and
social factors, more frequent and perhaps more marked disturbances related to dental occlu-
sion might be anticipated. Diet in the 21st century have moved increasingly towards ultra-pro-
cessed foods; they form the principal source of dietary calories in the USA and UK [116–118].
These foods are mostly industrial formulations, made from substances extracted from foods
alongside additives, which are designed to be hyper-palatable and ready-to-consume. They are
also often soft, quick to eat and undemanding to chew [119, 120]. An increase in the preva-
lence of diet related diseases has been attributed to the growing reliance on these foods due to
their high levels of unhealthy types of fat, refined starches, free sugars and salt [10]. Little
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
consideration has yet been made of their impact on the growth and development of the masti-
catory system. Studies have reported secular trends in the increased prevalence and severity of
malocclusion over the past century, which may reflect the greater uptake of these heavily pro-
cessed foods [121–123]. As a consequence, clinicians may need to be active in the physical
training of the masticatory system to ensure more optimal development in the absence of
appropriate dietary stimuli. Otherwise, negative functional consequences may result if the
masticatory system is not able to adapt to the rapid changes in food properties that are cur-
rently taking place.
Supporting information
S1 Text.
(DOCX)
S1 Video. Visualization of the power stroke simulation of individual SK2033 dated to the
medieval period performed using the Occlusal Fingerprint Analyser software package. The
movement trajectory of the lower teeth is more shallowly inclined and begins from a more lat-
erally shifted position during phase I of the power stroke when compared to the industrial
individual. Phase II occurs over a more elongated time segment and involved greater medial
movement of the lower teeth.
(MP4)
S2 Video. Visualization of the power stroke simulation of individual SK1010 dated to the
industrial period (AD 1700–1900) performed using the Occlusal Fingerprint Analyser
software package. This simulation showcases the movement trajectory of the lower teeth dur-
ing the power stroke. Note an oblique angle of approach during phase I of the power stroke
and a very brief phase II movement following maximum intercuspation.
(MP4)
S1 File.
(PDF)
S1 Data.
(CSV)
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jo Buckberry at Bradford University, Sophie Newman at Sheffield Uni-
versity, Jelena Bekvalac at the Museum of London and Carolyn Rando at UCL for their assis-
tance with access to skeletal collections, and Tony Dickens and the Whittle Laboratory,
University of Cambridge, for providing access to their structured light scanning system. We
also want to express our gratitude to the reviewers and the editor for substantial comments
which have greatly contributed to improving the manuscript.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Christopher Martin Silvester, Ottmar Kullmer, Simon Hillson.
Data curation: Christopher Martin Silvester.
Formal analysis: Christopher Martin Silvester.
Funding acquisition: Christopher Martin Silvester, Simon Hillson.
Investigation: Christopher Martin Silvester, Ottmar Kullmer.
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
Methodology: Christopher Martin Silvester, Ottmar Kullmer, Simon Hillson.
Project administration: Simon Hillson.
Supervision: Ottmar Kullmer, Simon Hillson.
Visualization: Christopher Martin Silvester.
Writing – original draft: Christopher Martin Silvester, Ottmar Kullmer.
Writing – review & editing: Christopher Martin Silvester, Ottmar Kullmer, Simon Hillson.
References 1. Corruccini RS. An epidemiologic transition in dental occlusion in world populations. Am J Orthod.
1984; 86(5): 419–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9416(84)90035-6 PMID: 6594064
2. Corruccini RS. How Anthropology Informs the Orthodontic Diagnosis of Malocclusion’s Causes. Lew-
iston: The Edwin Mellen Press; 1999.
3. Kaidonis J, Ranjitkar S, Lekkas D, Brook A, Townsend G. Functional dental occlusion: An anthropolog-
ical perspective and implications for practice. Aust Dent J. 2014; 59 (Suppl.1): 162–173.
4. Gron K, Sorenson L, Rowley-Conwy P. The early Neolithic Origins of Agriculture. In: Gron K, Sorenson
L, Rowley-Conwy P. Farmers at the frontier: a Pan-European perspective on neolithization. Oxford:
Oxbow Books; 2020.
5. Mays S. The relationship between molar wear and age in an early 19th century AD archaeological
human skeletal series of documented age at death. J Archaeol Sci. 2002; 29(8), 861–71.
6. Knapp V. Major Dietary Changes in Nineteenth-Century Europe. Perspect Biol Med 1988; 31(2), 188–
193. https://doi.org/10.1353/pbm.1988.0062 PMID: 3281131
7. Burnett J. Plenty and want: a social history of food in England from 1815 to the present day. London:
Routledge; 1989.
8. Drummond JC, Wilbraham A. The Englishman’s food: A history of five centuries of English diet. Lon-
don: Jonathan Cape; 1957.
9. Mintz SW. Sweetness and power: the place of sugar in modern history. New York: Penguin Books;
1985.
10. Cordain L, Sebastian A, Mann N, Lindeberg S, Watkins BA., O’Keefe JHet al. Origins and Evolution of
the Western Diet: Health Implications for the 21st Century. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005; 81(2), 341–54.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn.81.2.341 PMID: 15699220
11. Corruccini RS, Kaul SS, Chopra SRK, Karosas J, Larsen MD, Morrow CA. Epidemiological survey of
occlusion in North India. Br J Orthod. 1983; 10: 44–47. https://doi.org/10.1179/bjo.10.1.44 PMID:
6573199
12. Corruccini RS, Potter RHY, Dahlberg AA, Changing occlusal variation in Pima Amerinds. Am J Phys
Anthropol. 1983; 62(3): 317–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.1330620311 PMID: 6660288
13. Corruccini RS, Whitley LD. Occlusal variation in a rural Kentucky community. Am J Orthod 1981; 79
(3): 250–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9416(81)90073-7 PMID: 6938135
14. Rando C, Hillson S, Antoine D. Changes in mandibular dimensions during the mediaeval to post-medi-
aeval transition in London: A possible response to decreased masticatory load. Arch Oral Biol. 2014;
591: 73–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archoralbio.2013.10.001 PMID: 24169153
15. Kiliaridis S. The importance of masticatory muscle function in dentofacial growth. Semin Orthod. 2006;
12(2): 110–19.
16. Varrela J. Masticatory Function and Malocclusion: A Clinical Perspective. Semin Orthod 2006; 12(2):
102–109.
17. Brown T, Townsend G, Richards L, Burgess V. Concepts of occlusion: Australian evidence. Am J
Phys Anthropol 1990; 82(3): 247–256. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.1330820303 PMID: 2375377
18. Brown T, Townsend G, Pinkerton SK, Rogers JR. Yuendumu: Legacy of a longitudinal growth study in
Central Australia. Adelaide: University of Adelaide Press;2011.
19. Yamada K, Kimmel D, The effect of dietary consistency on bone mass and turnover in the growing rat
mandible. Arch Oral Biol. 1991; 36(2): 129–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-9969(91)90075-6
PMID: 1711839
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
20. Agrawal K, Lucas PW, Bruce I, Prinz J. Food Properties that Influence Neuromuscular Activity During
Human Mastication. J Dent Res. 1998; 77(11): 1931–1938. https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345980
770111101 PMID: 9823733
21. Hiiemae K. Mechanisms of Food Reduction, Transport and Deglutition: How the Texture of Food
Affects Feeding Behavior. J Texture Stud. 2004; 35(2): 171–200.
22. Koç H, Vinyard C, Essick G, Foegeding E. Food Oral Processing: Conversion of Food Structure to
Textural Perception. Annu Rev Food Sci Technol. 2013; 4(1): 237–266. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-food-030212-182637 PMID: 23244397
23. Thiery G, Guy F, Lazzari V. Investigating the dental toolkit of primates based on food mechanical prop-
erties: Feeding action does matter. Am J Primatol. 2017; 79(6): e22640 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1002/ajp.22640 PMID: 28150439
24. Chen J. Food oral processing-A review. Food Hydrocoll. 2009; 23(1): 1–25.
25. Hua L, Brandt E, Meullenet J, Zhou Z, Ungar P, Technical note: An in vitro study of dental microwear
formation using the BITE Master II chewing machine. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2015; 158(4): 769–775.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.22823 PMID: 26767349
26. Luther F. Orthodontics and the temporomandibular joint: where are we now? Part 1. Orthodontic treat-
ment and temporomandibular disorders. Angle Orthod. 1998; 68(4): 295–304. https://doi.org/10.1043/
0003-3219(1998)068<0295:OATTJW>2.3.CO;2 PMID: 9709830
27. Begg PR. Stone Age man’s dentition with reference to anatomically correct occlusion, the etiology of
malocclusion, and a technique for its treatment. Am J Orthod. 1954; 40(4): 298–312 (1954).
28. Kay RF, Hiiemae KM, Jaw movement and tooth use in recent and fossil primates. Am J Phys Anthro-
pol. 1974; 40: 227–256. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.1330400210 PMID: 4815136
29. Spears IR, Crompton RH. The mechanical significance of the occlusal geometry of great ape molars in
food breakdown. J Hum Evol. 1996; 31, 517–535.
30. Kullmer O, Menz U, Fiorenza L. Occlusal Fingerprint Analysis (OFA) reveals dental occlusal behavior
in primate molars. In: Martin T, Koenigswald W.v, editors. Mammalian Teeth-Form and Function.
Munich: Pfeil, 2020 pp.25–43.
31. Schultz JA, Martin T. Function of pretribosphenic and tribosphenic mammalian molars inferred from
3D animation. Naturwissenschaften 2014; 101, 771–781. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00114-014-1214-y
PMID: 25091547
32. Butler PM. Dentition in function. In: Osborn JW. (ed.) Dental Anatomy and Embryology. Blackwell:
Oxford; 1981.
33. Lewis R, Dwyer-Joyce R, Wear of human teeth: A tribological perspective. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. J
2005; 219(1), 1–18.
34. Kullmer O, Benazzi S, Schulz D, Gunz P, Kordos L, Begun DR. Dental arch restoration using tooth
macrowear patterns with application to Rudapithecus hungaricus, from the late Miocene of Ruda-
bánya, Hungary. J Hum Evol. 2013; 64(2),151–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2012.10.009
PMID: 23352561
35. Kullmer O, Schulz D, Benazzi S. An Experimental Approach to Evaluate the Correspondence Between
Wear Facet Position and Occlusal Movements. Anat Rec. 2012; 295(5), 846–852. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ar.22440 PMID: 22419654
36. Janis CM. The correlation between diet and dental wear in herbivorous mammals, and its relationship
to the determination of diets of extinct species. In: Boucot AJ, editors. Evolutionary Paleobiology of
Behavior and Coevolution. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science; 1990. pp.241–259.
37. Wv Koenigswald, Anders U, Engels S, Schultz JA, Kullmer O. Jaw movement in fossil mammals: Anal-
ysis, description and visualization. Palaontol Z. 2013; 87(1): 141–159.
38. Fiorenza L, Benazzi S, Estalrrich A, Kullmer O. Diet and cultural diversity in Neanderthals and modern
humans from dental macrowear analyses. In: Schmidt CW, Watson JT. Editors. Dental Wear in Evolu-
tionary and Biocultural Contexts. Amsterdam; Elsevier: 2020. pp.39–72.
39. Fiorenza L, Benazzi S, Oxilia G, Kullmer O. Functional relationship between dental macrowear and
diet in Late Pleistocene and recent modern human populations. Int J Osteoarchaeol. 2018; 28(2):
153–161.
40. Fiorenza L, Benazzi S, Tausch J, Kullmer O, Bromage T, Schrenk F et al. Molar Macrowear Reveals
Neanderthal Eco-Geographic Dietary Variation (Neanderthal Tooth Wear). PLoS ONE. 2011; 6(3):
E14769. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0014769 PMID: 21445243
41. Zanolli C, Kullmer O, Kelley J, Bacon A-M, Demeter F, Dumoncel J, et al. Evidence for increased homi-
nid diversity in the Early-Middle Pleistocene of Indonesia. Nat Ecol Evol. 2019; 3: 755–764. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41559-019-0860-z PMID: 30962558
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
42. Lobbezoo F, Ahlberg J, Glaros AG, Kato T, Koyano K, Lavigne GJ. et al. Bruxism defined and graded:
an international consensus. J Oral Rehabil. 2013; 40: 2–4. https://doi.org/10.1111/joor.12011 PMID:
23121262
43. Stone DJ. The consumption of field crops in Late Medieval England. In: Woolgar CM, Serjeantson D,
Waldron T. Editors. Food in medieval England: Diet and nutrition. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2006. pp.11–27.
44. Collins E. Dietary Change and Cereal Consumption in Britain in the Nineteenth Century. Agric Hist
Rev. 1975; 23(2); 97–115.
45. Eden FM. The State of the Poor: Or, An History of the Labouring Classes in England, from the Con-
quest to the Present Period. Printed by Davis J. for White B. and J.; 1795.
46. Engels F. The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844. J.W. Lovell Co.; 1844.
47. Perren R. Structural change and market growth in the food industry: flour milling in Britain, Europe, and
America, 1850–1914. Econ Hist Rev. 1990; 43(3): 420–437.
48. Kullmer O, Benazzi S, Fiorenza L, Schulz D, Bacso S, Winzen O. Technical note: Occlusal fingerprint
analysis: Quantification of tooth wear pattern. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2009; 139(4): 600–605. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.21086 PMID: 19425091
49. Hart D. A post-excavation assessment and updated project design for excavations at Eastgate square,
Chichester, West Sussex. ASE Report No 2012060; 2012.
50. Harvey W. Some dental and social conditions of 1696–1852 connected with St Bride’s Church, Fleet
Street, London. Med. Hist. 1968; 12: 62–76. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0025727300012771 PMID:
4867649
51. Raynor C, McCarthy R, Clough S. Coronation Street, South Shields, Tyne and Wear. Lancaster:
Oxford Archaeology North; 2011.
52. Adams J, Colls K. "Out of darkness, cometh light": Life and death in nineteenth-century Wolverhamp-
ton: Excavation of the overflow burial ground of St Peter’s Collegiate Church, Wolverhampton, 2001–
2002 BAR British series; 442. Oxford: Archaeopress; 2007.
53. McIntyre L, Bruce G. Excavating All Saints: A Medieval Church Rediscovered. Curr. Archaeol. 2002;
245: 30–37.
54. Stone R, Appleton-Fox N. A view from Hereford’s past: a report on the archaeological excavation in
Hereford Cathedral close in 1993. Logaston Press: Woonton Almeley; 1996.
55. Roberts I, Burgess A. Box Lane, Pontefract, West Yorkshire: Archaeological Rescue Excavation.
ASWYAS Report No. 706; 1999.
56. Atkin M. Excavations on Ladybellegate Street Car Park. Glevensis 1992; 26: 35–7.
57. Magilton JR, Lee F, Boylston A. Lepers outside the gate: excavations at the cemetery of the Hospital
of St James and St Mary Magdalene, Chichester, 1986–87 and 1993. York: Council for British
Archaeology; 2008.
58. Holt R. Gloucester in the century after the Black Death. Trans. Bristol Glos. Archaeol. Soc. 1985; 103:
149–161.
59. Silvester CM. Feeding the sick: An insight into dietary composition at a Medieval leper hospital using
dental wear pattern analysis. J. Archaeol. Sci. Rep. 2021; 38: 103054.
60. Silvester CM. A Dental Revolution? The intriguing effects of the profound social and dietary changes of
the 18/19th centuries on the masticatory system. Doctoral dissertation, University College London.
2021.
61. Knight-Sadler J, Fiorenza L. Tooth Wear Inclination in Great Ape Molars. Folia Primatol (Basel). 2017;
88: 223–236. https://doi.org/10.1159/000478775 PMID: 28810237
62. Smith BH. Patterns of molar wear in hunter-gatherers and agriculturists. Am J Phys Anthropol. 1984;
63 (1): 39–56. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.1330630107 PMID: 6422767
63. Phenice TW. A newly developed visual method of sexing the os pubis. Am J Phys Anthropol.1969; 30
(2): 297–301. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.1330300214 PMID: 5772048
64. Buikstra JE, Ubelaker DH. Standards for data collection from human skeletal remains. Proceedings of
a seminar at the field museum of natural history. Arkansas archaeological survey research series no.
44. Arkansas: Arkansas Archaeological Survey; 1994. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.6.2091 PMID:
8134354
65. Buckberry J, Chamberlain A. Age estimation from the auricular surface of the ilium: A revised method.
Am J Phys Anthropol. 2002; 119(3): 231–239. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.10130 PMID: 12365035
66. Fiorenza L, Benazzi S, Kullmer O. Morphology, wear and 3D digital surface models: Materials and
techniques to create high-resolution replicas of teeth. J Anthropol Sci. 2009; 87: 211–8. PMID:
19663176
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
67. Hung SH, Purk JH, Tira DE, Eick JD. Accuracy of one-step versus two-step putty wash addition sili-
cone impression technique. J Prosthet Dent. 1992; 67(5): 583–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3913
(92)90151-y PMID: 1527737
68. Jamshidy L, Mozaffari HR, Faraji P, Sharifi R. Accuracy of the One-Stage and Two-Stage Impression
Techniques: A Comparative Analysis. Int J Dent. 2016; 7256496. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/
7256496 PMID: 28003824
69. Varvara G, Murmura G, Sinjari B, Cardelli P, Caputi S. Evaluation of defects in surface detail for mono-
phase, 2-phase, and 3-phase impression techniques: An in vitro study. J Prosthet Dent. 2015; 1132
(2): 108–113.
70. Ulhaas L, Kullmer O, Schrenk F, Henke W. A new 3-d approach to determine functional morphology of
cercopithecoid molars. Ann Anat. 2004; 186(5): 487–493. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0940-9602(04)
80090-6 PMID: 15646282
71. Maier W, Schneck G. Konstruktionsmorphologische Untersuchungen am Gebiß der hominoiden Pri-
maten. Z Morph Anthropol. 1981; 72(2): 127–169.
72. Maier W, Scheck G. Functional Morphology of Hominoid Dentitions. J Hum Evol. 1982; 11(8): 693–696.
73. M‘Kirera F, Ungar PS. Occlusal Relief changes with molar wear in Pan troglodytes troglodytes and
Gorilla gorilla gorilla. Am J Phys Anthropol. (2003); 60(2): 31–41. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajp.10077
PMID: 12784284
74. Kullmer O, Huck M, Engel K, Schrenk F, Bromage T. Hominid Tooth Pattern Database (HOTPAD)
derived from optical 3D topometry. In: Mafart B., Delingette H. editors. Three-Dimensional Imaging in
Paleoanthropology and Prehistoric Archaeology. Liege; Acts of the XIVth UISPP Congress BAR Int.
Ser. 1049: 2002. pp. 71–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02402-6 PMID: 12379235
75. Aitchison JA. The statistical analysis of’ compositional data. London; Chapman and Hall: 1986.
76. van den Boogaart KG, Tolosana-Delgado R. Analyzing compositional data with R. Berlin: Springer;
2013.
77. Egozcue J, Pawlowsky-Glahn V, Mateu-Figueras G, Barceló-Vidal C. Isometric Logratio Transforma-
tions for Compositional Data Analysis. Math Geol. 2003; 35(3): 279–300.
78. Anderson MJ. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of variance. Austral Ecol. 2001;
26(1): 32–46.
79. Anderson MJ. Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA). In: Balakrishnan N.
StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online. Chichester: Wiley; 2017.
80. Agrawal KR, Lucas PW, Bruce IC, The effects of food fragmentation index on mandibular closing
angle in human mastication. Arch Oral Biol. 2000; 45(7): 577–584. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0003-
9969(00)00019-4 PMID: 10785521
81. Bakke M. Mandibular elevator muscles: physiology, action, and effect of dental occlusion. Scand J
Dent Res. 1993; 101: 314–331. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0722.1993.tb01127.x PMID: 8248735
82. Neill DJ, Howell PGT. Computerized kinesiography in the study of mastication in dentate subjects. J
Prosthet Dent. 1986; 55(5): 629–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3913(86)90046-6 PMID: 3458917
83. Woolgar CM. Meat and dairy products in Late Medieval England. In: Woolgar CM, Serjeantson D, Wal-
dron T. Editors. Food in medieval England: Diet and nutrition. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2006. pp. 88–102.
84. Woolgar CM. The culture of food in England, 1200–1500. New Haven: Yale University Press; 2016.
85. Le Luyer M, Rottier S, Bayle P. Brief communication: Comparative patterns of enamel thickness topog-
raphy and oblique molar wear in two early neolithic and medieval population samples. Am J Phys
Anthropol. 2014; 155(1): 162–172. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.22562 PMID: 24961878
86. Laird MF, Ross CF, O’Higgins P. Jaw kinematics and mandibular morphology in humans. J Hum Evol.
2020; 139: 102639. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2019.102639 PMID: 31841671
87. Pröschel P, Hofmann M. Frontal chewing patterns of the incisor point and their dependence on resis-
tance of food and type of occlusion. J Prosthet Dent. 1988; 59(5): 617–624. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0022-3913(88)90082-0 PMID: 3164394
88. Reed DA, Ross CF. The Influence of Food Material Properties on Jaw Kinematics in the Primate,
Cebus. Arch Oral Biol. 2010; 55(12): 946–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archoralbio.2010.08.008
PMID: 20880517
89. Alt KW, Rossbach A. Nothing in Nature Is as Consistent as Change. In: Koppe T, Meyer G, Alt KW.
Editors. Comparative Dental Morphology. Basel: Karger; 2009. pp.190–196.
90. Kaifu Y. Changes in the pattern of tooth wear from prehistoric to recent periods in Japan. Am J Phys
Anthropol. 1999; 109(4): 485–499. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199908)109:4<485::AID-
AJPA5>3.0.CO;2-K PMID: 10423264
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
91. Kaifu Y. Was extensive tooth wear normal in our ancestors? A preliminary examination in the genus
Homo. Anthropol Sci. 2000; 108: 471–485.
92. Mennell S. All manners of food: Eating and taste in England and France from the Middle Ages to the
present. Urbana: University of Illinois Press; 1996.
93. Karlsson S, Carlsson GE. Characteristics of mandibular masticatory movement in young and elderly
dentate subjects. J. Dent. Res. 1990; 69(2): 473–6. https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345900690021101
PMID: 2307750
94. Mioche L, Bourdiol P, Peyron M. Influence of age on mastication: Effects on eating behaviour. Nutr.
Res. Rev. 2004; 17(1): 43–54. https://doi.org/10.1079/NRR200375 PMID: 19079914
95. Peyron MA, Woda A, Bourdiol P, Hennequin M. Age-related changes in mastication. J. Oral Rehabil.
2017; 44: 299–312. https://doi.org/10.1111/joor.12478 PMID: 28029687
96. Woda A, Foster K, Mishellany A, Peyron MA. Adaptation of healthy mastication to factors pertaining to
the individual or to the food. Physiol. Behav. 2006; 89: 28–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2006.
02.013 PMID: 16581096
97. Griffin E. Diets, Hunger and Living Standards during the British Industrial Revolution. Past & Present
2018; 239: 71–111.
98. Kaifu Y, Kasai K, Townsend GC, Richards LC. Tooth Wear and the Design of the Human Dentition: A
Perspective from Evolutionary Medicine. Yearb. Phys. Anthropol. 2003; 46: 47–61. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ajpa.10329 PMID: 14666533
99. Kay RF. Mastication, Molar Tooth Structure and Diet in Primates. Doctoral dissertation, Yale Univer-
sity. 1973.
100. Fiorenza L. Occlusal Wear Pattern Analysis of Functional Morphology in Neanderthals and early
Homo sapiens dentition. Doctoral dissertation, Goethe University, Frankfurt. 2009.
101. Spears IR, Macho GA. Biomechanical behaviour of modern human molars: Implications for interpret-
ing the fossil record. Am J Phys Anthropol. 1998; 106(4): 467–482. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1096-8644(199808)106:4<467::AID-AJPA3>3.0.CO;2-G PMID: 9712476
102. Fiorenza L, Kullmer O. Occlusion in an Adult Male Gorilla with a Supernumerary Maxillary Premolar.
Int. J. Primatol. 2016; 37(6): 762–777.
103. Oxilia G, Bortolini E, Martini S, Papini A, Boggioni M, Buti L, et al. The physiological linkage between
molar inclination and dental macrowear pattern. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2018; 166(4): 941–951. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.23476 PMID: 29633246
104. Restrepo C, Peláez A, Alvarez E, Paucar C, Abad P. Digital imaging of patterns of dental wear to diag-
nose bruxism in children. Int. J. Paediatr. Dent. 2006; 16: 278–285. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
263X.2006.00756.x PMID: 16759326
105. Foley AJ. The daily grind: Assessing bruxism as a potential indicator of stress in archaeological human
remains. J. Archaeol. Sci. 2020; 117: 105117.
106. Manfredini D, Lobbezoo F. Role of psychosocial factors in the etiology of bruxism. J Orofac Pain.
2009; 23(2):153–66. PMID: 19492540
107. Temple DH, Goodman AH. Bioarcheology has a “health” problem: Conceptualizing “stress” and
“health” in bioarcheological research. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2014; 155(2): 186–191. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ajpa.22602 PMID: 25137442
108. Wall CE, Vinyard CJ, Johnson KR, Williams SH, Hylander WL. Phase II jaw movements and masseter
muscle activity during chewing in Papio anubis. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2006; 129(2): 215–224. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20290 PMID: 16278877
109. Krueger KL, Scott JR, Kay RF, Ungar PS. Technical Note: Dental Microwear Textures of Phase I and
Phase II Facets. Am J Phys Anthropol. 2008; 137: 485–490. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20928
PMID: 18785631
110. Hylander WL, Johnson K, Crompton AW. Loading patterns and jaw movements during mastication in
Macaca fascicularis: A bone-strain, electromyographic, and cineradiographic analysis. Am J Phys
Anthropol. 1987; 72(3): 287–314. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.1330720304 PMID: 3578494
111. Benazzi S, Nguyen HN, Kullmer O, Kupczik K. Dynamic Modelling of Tooth Deformation Using Occlu-
sal Kinematics and Finite Element Analysis. PLoS ONE. 2016; 11(3): e0152663. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0152663 PMID: 27031836
112. Grigoriadis A, Johansson R, TrulssonM. Temporal profile and amplitude of human masseter muscle
activity is adapted to food properties during individual chewing cycles. J Oral Rehabil. 2014; 41(5):
367–373. https://doi.org/10.1111/joor.12155 PMID: 24612326
113. Davies SJ, Gray RMJ, Smith PW. Good Occlusal Practice in Simple Restorative Dentistry. Br Dent J.
2001; 191 (7): 365–81. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bdj.4801185 PMID: 11697598
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
114. Hanihara K, Inoue N, Ito G, Kamekai T. Microevolution and tooth to denture base discrepancy in Japa-
nese dentition. Anthropol Sci. 1981; 89: 63–70.
115. Shiono K, Ito G, Inuzaka K, Hanihara K. Dentofacial morphology of Japanese skeletal remains from
later Jomon period. Anthropol Sci. 1982; 90: 259–268.
116. Baker P, Machado P, Santos T, Sievert K, Backholer K, Hadjikakou M et al. Ultra-processed foods and
the nutrition transition: Global, regional and national trends, food systems transformations and political
economy drivers. Obes Rev. 2020; 21(12): 1–22.
117. Martı́nez Steele E, Galastri Baraldi L, da Costa Louzada ML, Moubarac J-C, Mozaffarian D, Augusto
Monteiro C. Ultra-processed foods and added sugars in the US diet: Evidence from a nationally repre-
sentative cross-sectional study. BMJ Open. 2016; 6(3):009892. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-
2015-009892 PMID: 26962035
118. Rauber F, da Costa Louzada ML, Martı́nez Steele E, Millett C, Augusto Monteiro C, Bertazzi Levy R.
Ultra-Processed Food Consumption and Chronic Non-Communicable Diseases-Related Dietary Nutri-
ent Profile in the UK (2008–2014). Nutrients. 2018; 10(5): 587.
119. Hall KD, Ayuketah A, Brychta R, Cai H, Cassimatis T, Chen KY et al. Processed Diets Cause Excess
Calorie Intake and Weight Gain: An Inpatient Randomized Controlled Trial of Ad Libitum Food Intake.
Cell Metab. 2019; 30(1): 67–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.05.008 PMID: 31105044
120. Rolls BJ, Cunningham PM, Diktas HE. Properties of Ultraprocessed Foods That Can Drive Excess
Intake. Nutr Today. 2020; 55(3): 109–115.
121. Bollen A-M, Cunha-Cruz J, Hujoel PP. Secular trends in preadult orthodontic care in the United States:
1942–2002. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2007; 132(5): 579–585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.
2006.01.036 PMID: 18005830
122. Jonke E, Prossinger H, Bookstein FL, Schaefer K, Bernhard M, Freudenthaler JW. Secular trends in
the facial skull from the 19th century to the present, analyzed with geometric morphometrics. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2007; 132(1): 63–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2005.08.040 PMID:
17628252
123. Weiland FJ, Jonke E, Bantleon HP. Secular Trends in Malocclusion in Austrian Men. Eur J Orthod.
1997; 19 (4): 353–59. https://doi.org/10.1093/ejo/19.4.355 PMID: 9308255
PLOS ONE A dental revolution: The association between occlusion and chewing behaviour
https://notebooklm.google.com/notebook/e5d44deb-cb10-43c2-82f8-0333cf8410ad?authuser=2https://www.dentalinfo.nl/thema-a-z/caries/doorbraak-in-tandheelkunde-opgekweekte-tanden-als-alternatief-voor-vullingen/

Doorbraak in tandheelkunde: opgekweekte tanden als alternatief voor vullingen
Doorbraak in tandheelkunde opgekweekte tanden als alternatief voor vullingen
Volledig nieuwe tanden uit eigen lichaam in plaats van kunstmatige vullingen of implantaten? Het lijkt sciencefiction, maar onderzoekers van King’s College London zijn een grote stap dichterbij gekomen om dit werkelijkheid te maken.


Dankzij het onderzoek van Xuechen Zhang en dr. Ana Angelova Volponi kan de toekomst van de tandheelkunde er radicaal anders uitzien. In plaats van te vertrouwen op tandvullingen of implantaten, beide oplossingen die hun beperkingen hebben, zou het lichaam mogelijk zelf in staat zijn om nieuwe tanden te laten groeien.

Natuurlijke vervanging, geïnspireerd door de natuur
Sommige diersoorten zoals haaien en olifanten kunnen gedurende hun hele leven nieuwe tanden ontwikkelen. Mensen hebben die mogelijkheid niet: we krijgen slechts twee sets, waarvan de laatste blijvend is. Maar wat als we die biologische beperking kunnen omzeilen?

“Vullingen zijn niet de ideale oplossing voor tandherstel,” legt Zhang uit. “Ze verzwakken na verloop van tijd het tandweefsel, gaan niet eeuwig mee en kunnen leiden tot extra gevoeligheid of tandbederf. Ook implantaten, hoe geavanceerd ook, blijven onnatuurlijke ingrepen die niet volledig de functie van echte tanden nabootsen en vaak operatief worden geplaatst.”

De oplossing? Tanden gekweekt uit lichaamseigen cellen.

Celcommunicatie: de sleutel tot tandregeneratie
Het onderzoeksteam van King’s College werkte samen met Imperial College London om een innovatieve biomaterialenmatrix te ontwikkelen die de natuurlijke omgeving van tandcellen nabootst. Deze omgeving stelt cellen in staat om met elkaar te communiceren en zo het proces van tandvorming op gang te brengen.

Eerdere pogingen strandden omdat de signalen die de celgroei moesten stimuleren te abrupt werden afgegeven. De nieuwe techniek zorgt voor een geleidelijke afgifte van signalen, wat meer overeenkomt met de natuurlijke manier waarop het lichaam tanden vormt.

“We bootsen als het ware de biologische micro-omgeving na waarin tanden ontstaan,” aldus Zhang. “Daardoor begrijpen de cellen wat hun rol is en beginnen ze zich op natuurlijke wijze te differentiëren tot tandcellen.”

Neem deel aan het Elysee Dental Symposium Digital Dentistry in Lissabon
Elysee An Aesthetic revolution

Op 5 & 6 juni 2026 verwelkomen wij u graag in Lissabon/Cascais, Portugal. The Transformative Power of Digital Dentistry – An Aesthetic Revolution. Organisator: Modern Dental Europe, het moederbedrijf van Elysee Dental.  Lees meer

Van laboratorium naar mond
Nu wetenschappers erin geslaagd zijn om tanden te laten groeien in het lab, rijst de vraag: hoe krijgen we ze van petrischaal naar de kaak van de patiënt?

Er zijn twee mogelijke benaderingen. Ofwel worden jonge tandcellen direct op de plaats van de ontbrekende tand geplaatst en groeien ze daaruit tot een volledige tand. Of een complete tand wordt in het lab gekweekt en later getransplanteerd.

Beide benaderingen vallen onder het domein van regeneratieve geneeskunde, een snelgroeiend veld dat inzet op natuurlijke genezing met behulp van stamcellen en bio-engineering, in plaats van kunstmatige materialen zoals metaal of kunststof.

Een revolutie in tandzorg?
Volgens dr. Ana Angelova Volponi biedt deze techniek een duurzaam en effectief alternatief voor conventionele tandheelkunde. “De integratie van deze innovatieve methoden kan de manier waarop we tanden herstellen volledig veranderen. Ons werk binnen de Faculteit voor Tandheelkunde, Mond- en Schedelwetenschappen van King’s College London weerspiegelt de toewijding om de mondgezondheid te verbeteren via wetenschappelijke vooruitgang.”

 

Bronnen:

Zhang X, Volponi AA. Matrix-mimicking hydrogel enables tooth organoid induction via spatiotemporal signaling control. PubMed (2024). Link naar onderzoek

King’s College London, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences.



---



https://luminancedentaire.ca/japanese-scientists-human-trials-tooth-regrowth-drug/

Wetenschappers in Japan zijn gestart met klinische tests op mensen voor TRG-035, een revolutionair medicijn dat de natuurlijke teruggroei van tanden stimuleert door het eiwit USAG-1 te blokkeren. De bron legt uit dat dit middel slapende tandkiemen in het lichaam reactiveert, een proces dat na succesvolle dierproeven nu wordt getoetst op veiligheid bij volwassen patiënten. Het artikel schetst een toekomstvisie op regeneratieve tandheelkunde, waarbij biologische herstelmethoden tegen 2030 een alternatief kunnen bieden voor kunstmatige implantaten of kunstgebitten. Naast de medische werking worden ook de noodzakelijke ethische overwegingen en de strikte regelgeving besproken die gepaard gaan met deze innovatieve biotechnologie.

Japanese Scientists Begin Human Trials for Tooth Regrowth Drug
Jun 1, 2025 | Dr. Angel Gabev
Japanese scientists at Kyoto University Hospital have initiated human clinical trials of TRG-035, a novel intravenous drug that targets the USAG-1 protein to stimulate natural tooth regrowth, potentially revolutionizing dental care by offering a regenerative alternative to implants and dentures.
Table of Contents
Japanese scientists have started human trials for a new drug aimed at regrowing human teeth, marking a significant advancement in dental innovation. Human trials play a vital role in the development of dental medications, as they help determine the safety and effectiveness of these drugs before they are widely used. This groundbreaking tooth regrowth medication, created by researchers in Japan, has the potential to greatly improve dental care.
Important NoticeAt Luminance Dentaire, we do not conduct or participate in any research or clinical trials for the tooth regrowth drug (TRG-035) currently being studied in Japan. We are a local dental clinic in Dollard-des-Ormeaux (West Island, Montreal), providing family and cosmetic dental care to our patients.
If you are interested in the ongoing tooth regrowth trials, please note that they are being conducted by researchers in Japan, not in Canada.
For questions about your dental health, treatment options, or to book an appointment, our team will be happy to assist you.
TRG-035: The Tooth Regrowth Drug Explained
The drug at the center of this dental breakthrough is known as TRG-035. Its innovation lies in how it interacts with a specific protein called USAG-1. Scientists identified USAG-1 as a natural inhibitor in the human body, responsible for keeping tooth buds, the embryonic precursors to new teeth, in a dormant state after adult teeth have developed.
How does TRG-035 work?
1 Targeting USAG-1 Protein: TRG-035 blocks the activity of the USAG-1 protein. In doing so, it removes a critical barrier that prevents the growth of additional sets of teeth beyond childhood and adulthood.
2 Tooth Buds Reactivation: Once USAG-1 is neutralized, dormant tooth buds can be reactivated. This triggers biological processes similar to those seen during initial tooth development, allowing for the formation and eruption of new teeth where they are missing.
3 Intravenous Injection Treatment: Unlike topical gels or dental implants, TRG-035 is administered through an intravenous injection. This delivery method ensures the drug reaches systemic circulation quickly and effectively targets the intended biological pathways.
Researchers believe that by harnessing this pathway, TRG-035 may offer a way to regenerate lost teeth naturally, a prospect with significant implications for dental patients worldwide.
Success in Animal Trials: A Glimpse of Hope
Before moving to human trials, researchers conducted extensive animal trials to test the efficacy and safety of TRG-035. These trials involved mice, ferrets, and dogs.
1. Mice Trials
The initial trials focused on mice due to their well-studied genetic makeup and shorter life cycles. Researchers observed successful tooth growth with no significant adverse effects.
2. Ferret Trials
Following promising results in mice, the drug was tested on ferrets. Ferrets were chosen because their dental structure closely resembles that of humans. The outcomes showed new teeth developing effectively.
3. Dog Trials
Lastly, trials were extended to dogs, providing further insight into the drug’s potential across different mammalian species. Dogs successfully grew functional teeth, reinforcing the drug’s versatility and effectiveness.
These positive results in various animals suggest TRG-035 could be effective in humans. The next step is to validate this potential through rigorous human trials, ensuring both safety and efficacy in a broader population.
Human Trials at Kyoto University Hospital: A New Era in Dental Care?
Japanese scientists have begun human trials of a new drug designed to regrow human teeth at Kyoto University Hospital, marking a significant milestone in dental care. The Phase 1 human trials involve 30 healthy adults aged between 30 and 64, each missing at least one tooth.
The primary goal of these trials is to evaluate the safety profile of the TRG-035 drug in humans. Participants receive intravenous injections of the drug, allowing researchers to monitor for any adverse effects and assess the proper dosing required for optimal results.
By focusing on safety and dosage, these trials aim to lay the groundwork for subsequent phases that will test the efficacy of TRG-035 in broader populations, including children suffering from congenital tooth agenesis, a condition where multiple teeth are missing from birth.
Kyoto University Hospital’s approach emphasizes careful monitoring and rigorous data collection to ensure the drug’s viability for widespread use. If successful, these trials could herald a new era in regenerative dentistry, offering hope for millions affected by tooth loss.
In addition to groundbreaking treatments like TRG-035, it’s essential to remember that maintaining oral health is equally important. For instance, knowing the best ways to whiten teeth can significantly enhance one’s smile. Moreover, understanding how to manage sensitive teeth and gums effectively can improve overall comfort and quality of life.
Furthermore, with advancements in dental medicine, procedures such as wisdom teeth removal, which were once daunting for many patients, are now more manageable with better recovery strategies and understanding of potential complications.
The Future of Tooth Loss Solutions: Regenerative Dentistry Takes Center Stage
Regenerative dental medicine is set to change the game when it comes to treating tooth loss. It offers significant advantages over traditional methods like implants and dentures.
Advantages of Natural Regeneration
1 Natural appearance and function: Unlike implants and dentures, regenerated teeth closely mimic the natural structure and function of original teeth.
2 Reduced risk of infection and complications: Implants can sometimes cause infections or other complications. Regenerated teeth, grown from the body’s own cells, minimize these risks.
3 Long-term durability: Dentures need frequent adjustments and replacements, while regenerated teeth can potentially last a lifetime.
Potential Impact and Availability
The TRG-035 drug is an exciting development in regenerative dentistry. Experts anticipate its commercial availability by 2030, which could drastically change how dental care solutions are approached.
Impact on Dental Care Solutions
1 Accessibility for various age groups: From children born with missing teeth to elderly individuals seeking alternatives to dentures, this drug could benefit a wide range of patients.
2 Transformative potential in dental practice: Dentists might shift from focusing on artificial replacements to fostering natural tooth regrowth, enhancing patient outcomes and satisfaction.
Researchers remain optimistic about the future of TRG-035, envisioning a new era where tooth loss no longer necessitates artificial replacements but instead embraces natural regeneration.
Navigating Ethical Challenges and Regulatory Hurdles in Dental Drug Development
Developing and testing dental drugs like TRG-035 involves dealing with complex ethical considerations. It’s essential to prioritize the well-being of trial participants, obtain informed consent, and maintain transparency throughout these stages. Researchers must also find ways to address ethical dilemmas concerning patient safety, potential side effects, and the long-term effects of new treatments.
Regulatory evaluations are crucial in the process of developing new dental drugs. Organizations such as the FDA and EMA review various aspects:
1 Safety: Thorough testing to ensure the drug does not cause harm.
2 Efficacy: Proof that the drug effectively stimulates tooth regrowth.
3 Quality control: Consistency in manufacturing and administration processes.
These evaluations guarantee that any new drug meets strict standards before it can be widely used, protecting public health while promoting innovation in dental care.
Expert Opinions and Future Challenges in Tooth Regeneration Research
Perspectives from Leading Experts
1 Professor Angray Kang, Queen Mary University of London: “Exciting and worth pursuing,” but reminds us it’s “not a short sprint, but back-to-back ultra-marathons.”
2 Dr. Chengfei Zhang highlights the revolutionary yet somewhat controversial nature of TRG-035, emphasizing rigorous testing to ensure broad applicability.
Future Challenges
Experts agree that the road ahead for tooth regeneration drugs like TRG-035 is paved with significant challenges. These include:
1 Ensuring long-term safety through extensive trials
2 Navigating ethical considerations in treatment applications
3 Addressing global regulatory evaluations to guarantee efficacy and quality control
Japanese scientists have begun human trials of a new drug designed to regrow human teeth, setting a promising but cautious path forward in dental care innovation.
Sources
1 Nakao K., et al., “Regeneration of Teeth by Cell Transplantation,” Scientific Reports (2023).
2 National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) Japan News Release (June 2024): https://www.nims.go.jp/eng/news/press/202406100.html
3 The Japan Times – “Japan begins first clinical trial for medicine aimed at growing lost teeth” (June 2024): https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2024/06/10/japan/science-health/regrow-lost-teeth-clinical-trial/
4 BBC News – “Japan starts world-first clinical trial into growing lost teeth” (June 2024): https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-68885056
5 Nature – “Tooth regeneration by inhibition of USAG‐1 promotes third dentition” (2021): https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-23108-y





---




Deze bron betreft een gearchiveerde discussie op het forum Reddit waarin experts en geïnteresseerden de haalbaarheid van het teruggroeien van tanden met stamcellen bespreken. De tekst belicht de technische complexiteit van dit proces, waarbij de nadruk ligt op de moeilijkheid om tanden correct te positioneren en de noodzaak om biologische structuren zoals zenuwen en bloedvaten te integreren. Hoewel de wetenschappelijke potentie wordt erkend, wijzen deelnemers op aanzienlijke barrières zoals de hoge verwachte kosten en de lange ontwikkeltijd in vergelijking met de huidige gouden standaard, het tandheelkundig implantaat. Het hoofddoel van de tekst is om de kloof tussen theoretische medische mogelijkheden en de praktische klinische realiteit van de komende decennia in kaart te brengen.

0 Skip to main content Navigatie openen Ga naar Reddit Home Inloggen Log in op Reddit Instellingenmenu openen
1 Inloggen/aanmelden
2 Adverteren op Reddit
3 Cookievoorkeuren
4 Probeer Reddit Pro BÈTA
5 Weergavemodus
0 Reddit, Inc. © 2026. Alle rechten voorbehouden. Link kopiëren
1 Link kopiëren
Vertalingen actief Oorspronkelijke versie weergeven Bedankt voor de feedback!
Vertel ons waarom je deze content niet nuttig vindt.
Ga naar askscience r/asksciencer/askscience Stel een wetenschappelijke vraag, krijg een wetenschappelijk antwoord.
Leden • Parking_Garlic2265DeutschBahasa MelayuRomânăবাংলা한국어Português (Portugal)ČeštinaSvenskaEspañol (España)MagyarEspañol (Latinoamérica)ไทยΕλληνικάItalianoTürkçeFilipino Kunnen tanden echt worden teruggegroeid met stamcellen?
Medicine Hoe geavanceerd is deze techniek? Zal deze in het volgende decennium commercieel beschikbaar zijn?
2 Post gearchiveerd. Je kunt geen nieuwe opmerkingen posten en je kunt niet stemmen. Delen Sorteren op: Beste Opties voor sorteren van opmerkingen openen Beste
3 Top
4 Nieuw
5 Controversieel
6 Oud
7 Q&amp;A
WedgeTurn • 3 jaar geleden Er zijn meer dan één probleem die opgelost moeten worden om dit een haalbare behandeling te maken. Het probleem is niet alleen 'Kunnen we tanden laten teruggroeien uit stamcellen?', we weten al dat dat mogelijk zou kunnen zijn. Maar hoe krijgen we de tandkiem veilig en voorspelbaar op de juiste plek zodat de tand recht en functioneel groeit en niet scheef? Wat als er niet genoeg bot is op de plek waar we de tand willen laten teruggroeien? Hoe lang duurt het uiteindelijk van tandverlies tot volledig teruggegroeide tand? Hoe duur gaat dit worden? Hoe zal de tand eruit zien, heeft hij meteen een kroon nodig om goed te functioneren en esthetisch te mengen met de andere tanden?
Ik denk dat we de eerste teruggegroeide menselijke tand in de komende 10-15 jaar kunnen zien. Maar het zal lange tijd niet haalbaar zijn in een klinische setting, en zelfs dan zal het een super high-end behandelingsoptie zijn en niet gemakkelijk toegankelijk voor iedereen. Op dit moment kost een implantaat (wat de gouden standaardbehandeling is voor verloren tanden) ongeveer 3000-5000 USD, het duurt ongeveer 3-6 maanden van begin tot eind en het is nu een zeer voorspelbare en bewezen behandelingsoptie. Een implantaat is echter geen perfecte vervanging van een natuurlijke tand, het heeft zijn eigen risico's en nadelen, maar het is het beste wat we nu hebben. Zeker, een teruggegroeide tand zou in sommige opzichten beter zijn dan een implantaat, maar het zou implantaten in meer dan één categorie moeten overtreffen om de nieuwe gouden standaard te worden. Ze zouden verboden duur zijn, ze zouden alleen beschikbaar zijn in zeer gespecialiseerde klinieken (in tegenstelling tot implantaten die in veel reguliere tandartspraktijken over de hele wereld worden geplaatst) en het zal waarschijnlijk ook langer duren. Dus verwacht geen wonderen snel.
[gewist] • 3 jaar geleden Ik heb hierover nagedacht en er zijn zoveel problemen. Je hebt er veel van aangehaald. Veel draaien om het feit dat we geen foetus zijn in een soort "schorsing" die via onze navel wordt gevoed terwijl alles samen groeit.
De tand zou in situ in de kaak moeten groeien, dus dat kost behoorlijk wat tijd. In de tussentijd moeten we eten, dus je moet de ontwikkelende tand beschermen tegen bijtkrachten en alle bacteriën in de mond. Voor een levende tand moet je wachten op de groei van bloedvaten en zenuwen, twee dingen waarvan ik aanneem dat ze zouden vereisen dat je ze zaait met een soort groeifactoren.
Hoe zouden de wortels zich in het bot ontwikkelen? Normaal gesproken groeien ze samen, maar hier is de kaak al ontwikkeld, dus snijd je dan kanalen in het bot? Zou het op de een of andere manier in het bot groeien?
Zelfs als je tanden in een laboratorium zou kunnen kweken, zou je nog steeds een manier nodig hebben om een levende tand te kweken en te implanteren, tenzij je een dode tand wilt. Je zou nog steeds wortels nodig hebben om hem vast te houden, te genezen, vaten en zenuwen te laten groeien, enz.
Friengers • 3 jaar geleden De meest waarschijnlijke toepassing van in het lab gekweekte tanden is imo dat ze in een laboratoriumomgeving tot de juiste grootte worden gekweekt en dat er een soort herplantprotocol is voor integratie in de kaak. We kunnen momenteel al tanden met enig succes herplanten, dus alleen al vanuit biologisch oogpunt lijkt dat een zeer haalbare workflow.
WedgeTurn • 3 jaar geleden De tand zou in situ in de kaak moeten groeien, dus dat kost behoorlijk wat tijd. In de tussentijd moeten we eten, dus je moet de ontwikkelende tand beschermen tegen bijtkrachten en alle bacteriën in de mond. Voor een levende tand moet je wachten op de groei van bloedvaten en zenuwen, twee dingen waarvan ik aanneem dat ze zouden vereisen dat je hem zaait met een soort groeifactoren.
Hoe zouden de wortels zich in het bot ontwikkelen? Normaal gesproken groeien ze samen, maar hier is de kaak al ontwikkeld, dus snij je dan kanalen in het bot? Zou het op de een of andere manier in het bot groeien?
Dat is echter niet het echte probleem, de secundaire dentitie groeit in terwijl de kaak volledig ontwikkeld is - de ontluikende tanden veroorzaken een resorptie van het omringende bot.
Unlikely-Answer • 3 jaar geleden Ik herinner me dat ik jaren geleden las dat ze het met konijnen met succes hebben laten gebeuren, het probleem was dat het glazuur zich niet ontwikkelde, waardoor de tand in een mum van tijd zou rotten.
CodingLazily • 3 jaar geleden Ik vraag me af hoe veel gemakkelijker het is bij konijnen, aangezien hun tanden continu groeien.
Nog reacties Meer reacties Meer reacties Meer reacties btribble • 3 jaar geleden Ik denk dat de meest realistische "in het lab gekweekte" optie een combinatie van stamcellen en 3D-printen zal zijn. Om een levensvatbare transplantatie te maken, moet je waarschijnlijk ook een stuk kaakbeen kweken en het geheel operatief implanteren. Dat betekent nog steeds niet dat dit binnen een decennium gebeurt, tenzij AI krankzinnig snelle vooruitgang boekt.
light_trick • 3 jaar geleden Dit zou mijn aanname zijn geweest: in plaats van te proberen van scratch te groeien, gebruik een weefsel-scaffolding benadering om de tand te boostrappen met de stamcellen die ervoor zorgen dat het op een duurzame manier aan de rest van het lichaam bindt.
RogerSterlingsFling • 3 jaar geleden Osteo-integratie buiten het lichaam is absoluut de betere manier om zo'n tand te transplanteren.
Het doet me afvragen waarom we dit momenteel niet doen voor implantaten, met behulp van groeifactoren etc. die het implantaat coaten voordat we het inbrengen (behalve kosten en voorspelbaarheid misschien).
[gewist] • 3 jaar geleden • bewerkt 3 jaar geleden
Ik vraag me af of onderzoek naar teratomen zou kunnen helpen, aangezien ze soms volledig ontwikkelde tanden erin vinden.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3800651/
Meer reacties CanadaPlus101 • 3 jaar geleden Waarom dan niet gewoon voor een implantaat gaan op dat moment?
Meer reacties RickytyMort • 3 jaar geleden Het opnieuw laten groeien van tanden is niet de belangrijkste zorg. De meeste mensen die tanden missen hebben meestal niet het geld om implantaten te krijgen of in dit geval een nieuwe tand te laten groeien.
De veel praktischere toepassing is het repareren van tanden. In plaats van een hele tand te laten groeien, heb je alleen een nieuwe glazuurlaag nodig.
Is dat op de een of andere manier verder weg dan het opnieuw laten groeien van hele tanden? Organische vullingen zouden een enorme sprong voorwaarts zijn. Dat zou de behoefte aan implantaten op zichzelf aanzienlijk verminderen.




---




Deze bron onderzoekt de innovatieve wetenschap van tandregeneratie, een veld binnen de regeneratieve geneeskunde dat streeft naar het vervangen van verloren tanden door ze biologisch te laten hergroeien uit stamcellen. De tekst beschrijft hoe onderzoekers gebruikmaken van hergeprogrammeerde cellen en biologische structuren om natuurlijke tandvorming na te bootsen, met recente mijlpalen zoals de start van klinische proeven en het succesvol kweken van tandweefsel in laboratoria. Ondanks deze hoopvolle ontwikkelingen benadrukt het artikel dat er nog aanzienlijke technische en ethische uitdagingen zijn, waaronder veiligheidsrisico's en de complexiteit van het volledig reproduceren van de menselijke anatomie. Het doel van de tekst is om de historische voortgang, de huidige experimentele technieken en de barrières op weg naar een alternatief voor implantaten en vullingen in kaart te brengen.

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bioengineering technique to regenerate teeth A set of human teeth under an orthopantomogram
Tooth regeneration is a stem cell based regenerative medicine procedure in the field of tissue engineering and stem cell biology to replace damaged or lost teeth by regrowing them from autologous stem cells.[ 1 ]
As a source of the new bioengineered teeth, somatic stem cells are collected and reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem cells which can be placed in the dental lamina directly or placed in a reabsorbable biopolymer[ 2 ] in the shape of the new tooth.[ 3 ]
History
[edit]
Young et al first demonstrated in 2002 that teeth could be regenerated from cells.[ 4 ]
The first clinical trial on tooth regeneration started in 2023 in Japan, for a medicine stimulating tooth regrowth by inhibition of USAG-1.[ 5 ][ 6 ][ 7 ]
In April 2025, researchers in the UK successfully grew human teeth in a lab, offering a potential alternative to dental implants and fillings.[ 8 ]
Lab-grown tooth-like structures
[edit]
In 2025, researchers at King's College London led by Ana Angelova Volponi reported the laboratory generation of early tooth-like structures using a hydrogel scaffold designed to support interactions between odontogenic cells. The engineered matrix was shown to encourage the organization of developing tooth tissue precursors, suggesting a possible way toward biological tooth replacement. Researchers noted that the constructs do not yet replicate the full morphology or function of natural teeth in humans, and the approach remains at an experimental preclinical stage. However, the development was described as a meaningful advance in regenerative dentistry and tooth repair research.[ 9 ][ 10 ][ 11 ] Researchers note that significant challenges remain before lab-grown teeth can be used clinically in humans. The lab work aims to improve interactions between cells involved in tooth formation, but methods for reliably replacing embryonic model cells with adult human cells have not yet been known. Possible future approaches if the research succeeded in humans, include partially growing a tooth in vitro before implantation into the tooth socket to complete development, or fully growing a tooth in the laboratory prior to surgical implantation. Researchers emphasize that these applications remain experimental and are not yet ready for clinical use.[ 12 ]
Challenges
[edit]
The majority of stem cell studies have stopped at the stage of animal studies and have not proceeded to clinical trials due to numerous safety and ethical concerns. The potential risks of undesired tissue formation, tumourigenesis, and metastasis have not yet been resolved.[ 13 ]
See also
[edit]
1 Medicine portal
1 Anodontia
2 Epithelial cell rests of Malassez
3 Polyphyodont
4 Regenerative endodontics
5 Socket preservation
6 Tooth development
References
[edit]
1 ^Otsu, Keishi; Kumakami-Sakano, Mika; Fujiwara, Naoki; Kikuchi, Kazuko; Keller, Laetitia; Lesot, Hervé; Harada, Hidemitsu (2014). "Stem cell sources for tooth regeneration: current status and future prospects". Frontiers in Physiology. 5: 36. doi:10.3389/fphys.2014.00036. PMC3912331. PMID24550845.
2 ^Kellomäki, Minna; Törmälä, Pertti (2003). "Processing of Resorbable Poly-α-Hydroxy Acids for Use as Tissue-Engineering Scaffolds". Biopolymer Methods in Tissue Engineering. Vol. 238. pp. 1– 10. doi:10.1385/1-59259-428-X:1. ISBN978-1-59259-428-3.
3 ^Hill, David J. (10 May 2012). "Toothless No More - Researchers Using Stem Cells to Grow New Teeth". Singularity Hub.
4 ^Young, C.S.; Terada, S.; Vacanti, J.P.; Honda, M.; Bartlett, J.D.; Yelick, P.C. (October 2002). "Tissue Engineering of Complex Tooth Structures on Biodegradable Polymer Scaffolds". Journal of Dental Research. 81 (10): 695– 700. doi:10.1177/154405910208101008. PMID12351668.
5 ^"World's 1st 'tooth regrowth' medicine moves toward clinical trials in Japan". Mainichi. 12 June 2023.
6 ^Murashima-Suginami A, Kiso H, Tokita Y, Mihara E, Nambu Y, Uozumi R, Tabata Y, Bessho K, Takagi J, Sugai M, Takahashi K (February 2021). "Anti-USAG-1 therapy for tooth regeneration through enhanced BMP signaling". Science Advances. 7 (7). doi:10.1126/sciadv.abf1798. PMC7880588. PMID33579703.
7 ^Ravi V, Murashima-Suginami A, Kiso H, Tokita Y, Huang CL, Bessho K, Takagi J, Sugai M, Tabata Y, Takahashi K (March 2023). "Advances in tooth agenesis and tooth regeneration". Regenerative Therapy. 22: 160– 168. doi:10.1016/j.reth.2023.01.004. PMC9931762. PMID36819612.
8 ^"Scientists grow human teeth in a lab, and it may change dentistry forever". The Times of India. April 15, 2025 . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .
9 ^"Lab-grown teeth might become an alternative to fillings following research breakthrough". King's College London. 14 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 November 2025 .
10 ^"Lab-Grown Teeth: A Natural Alternative to Fillings and Implants". ChemistryViews. 26 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 November 2025 .
11 ^"Lab-grown human teeth: the future of regenerative dentistry". Progress Educational Trust (BioNews). 14 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 November 2025 .
12 ^Prisco, Jacopo (2025-10-24). "Scientists are racing to grow human teeth in the lab". CNN. Retrieved 2025-11-01 .
13 ^Thalakiriyawa, Dineshi Sewvandi; Dissanayaka, Waruna Lakmal (February 2024). "Advances in Regenerative Dentistry Approaches: An Update". International Dental Journal. 74 (1): 25– 34. doi:10.1016/j.identj.2023.07.008. PMC10829373. PMID37541918.
This dentistry article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by adding missing information.
1 v
2 t
3 e
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tooth_regeneration&oldid=1319870001" Categories:
1 Restorative dentistry
2 Dentistry stubs




-




De toekomst van tandheelkunde is zéér veelbelovend, maar het vraagt geduld, correcte informatie, en een goed begrip van wat wetenschappelijk haalbaar is. We staan aan de vooravond van grote veranderingen, maar de weg is nog lang.
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1g38GNruA2aoYcphoZlzpotHSWJxNF2L0MYKNvlX12JA/edit?usp=sharing
De Toekomst van Tanden: Wat Kan Wel en Wat Kan Nog Niet?Droom je ervan dat iemand je tanden kan laten teruggroeien zoals je haar laat groeien na een knipbeurt? Goed nieuws: de wetenschap werkt er hard aan! Helaas is het geen kwestie van een pleister plakken en wachten. De weg naar échte tandregeneratie is complex, maar er zijn twee hoofdlijnen die veelbelovend zijn.
Twee Grote Pijlers van Tandregeneratie:We kunnen tandregeneratie grofweg indelen in twee categorieën, die elk hun eigen wetenschap, toepassingen en tijdlijnen hebben:
Dentine-herstel: De Tand Zelf Laten Repareren (Relatief korte termijn)Nieuwe Tanden Laten Groeien: Een Compleet Nieuwe Tand Maken (Lange termijn)
Laten we dieper duiken.

Pijler 1: Dentine-Herstel – De Tand Zelf Laten ReparerenDit gaat over het helpen van je bestaande tand om zichzelf van binnenuit te herstellen. Denk aan diepe gaatjes die nu nog met een vulling behandeld worden.
De Wetenschap Erachter:
Stamcellen in de Tand: Elke levende tand heeft een "pulpa" in het midden, waar bloedvaten en zenuwen zitten. Hierin bevinden zich ook speciale tandpulpa-stamcellen (DPSCs). Dit zijn soort van 'jonge, ongedifferentieerde cellen' die nog kunnen veranderen in verschillende soorten tandweefsel.De Wnt/β-catencine Signaalroute: Dit is een soort 'communicatiekanaal' in onze cellen dat cruciaal is voor ontwikkeling en herstel. Een stof genaamd GSK-3 werkt hier normaal als een soort "rem" op.Het Medicijn: Tideglusib (en vergelijkbare stoffen): Wetenschappers hebben ontdekt dat een medicijn zoals Tideglusib, oorspronkelijk ontwikkeld voor hersenziekten zoals Alzheimer, deze "rem" (GSK-3) kan blokkeren.Het Resultaat: Als de rem eraf is, wordt de communicatie via de Wnt/β-catencine route geactiveerd. Dit "wake-up call" zorgt ervoor dat de tandpulpa-stamcellen worden gestimuleerd om te veranderen in nieuwe dentine-cellen. Deze nieuwe dentine-cellen maken vervolgens nieuw dentine aan, het stevige materiaal dat onder het glazuur zit.
Wat het kan:
Diepe gaatjes van binnenuit laten helen.Beschadigde dentine herstellen.Dit kan een alternatief worden voor traditionele, kunstmatige vullingen die na verloop van tijd kunnen falen.
Wat het NIET kan:
Glazuur laten teruggroeien: Glazuur is het hardste materiaal in ons lichaam, maar het heeft geen levende cellen en kan zichzelf niet repareren zoals bot of dentine. Verlies van glazuur is permanent, tenzij we het met kunstmatige middelen aanvullen.Een compleet nieuwe tand maken.
Leveringsmethode & Behandeling:
Om de stamcellen te bereiken, moet het medicijn rechtstreeks in de caviteit worden aangebracht. Denk aan een klein, oplosbaar sponsje dat met het medicijn is geïmpregneerd en in het geboorde gat wordt geplaatst. Na verloop van tijd lost het sponsje op en is het gat opgevuld met nieuw dentine. Dit vereist dus nog steeds het verwijderen van de cariës.Een simpele pleister op het tandvlees is hiervoor niet efficiënt genoeg.
Termijn:
Eerste paar jaar (nu tot ~2026/2027): We bevinden ons nog in de onderzoeks- en ontwikkelingsfase. Er zijn veelbelovende resultaten in diermodellen. Klinische studies bij mensen zijn nog beperkt of aan het opstarten, en focussen op veiligheid en effectiviteit.Eerste 5 jaar (~2026-2031): Het is mogelijk dat we in deze periode de eerste commerciële producten op de markt zien komen voor beperkte dentine-hersteltoepassingen. Dit zijn waarschijnlijk nog geen wondermiddelen voor elk gaatje, maar eerder gespecialiseerde behandelingen. Het zal nog steeds tandarts-ingrijpen vereisen.Eerste 10 jaar en verder: Dit soort dentine-herstel zou een standaard onderdeel kunnen worden van restauratieve tandheelkunde.

Pijler 2: Nieuwe Tanden Laten Groeien – Een Compleet Nieuwe Tand MakenDit is de meest futuristische en potentieel baanbrekende technologie: het laten groeien van een volledig nieuwe, functionele tand op de plek van een verloren tand.
De Wetenschap Erachter:
Dormante Tandknoppen: Mensen zijn in principe geboren met de potentie om een derde set tanden te ontwikkelen, naast de melk- en blijvende tanden. Deze 'knoppen' blijven echter slapend, omdat er natuurlijke remmende factoren zijn die de groei ervan tegenhouden zodra je blijvende gebit er is.Het Eiwit USAG-1: Een van de belangrijkste "remmen" die de ontwikkeling van nieuwe tanden tegenhoudt, is een eiwit genaamd USAG-1. Dit eiwit werkt als een boodschapper die een signaal afgeeft om de groei te stoppen.Het Medicijn: TRG-035 (een antilichaam): Japanse onderzoekers hebben een monoklonaal antilichaam ontwikkeld, TRG-035 genaamd. Dit antilichaam is specifiek ontworpen om het USAG-1 eiwit te neutraliseren of "uit te schakelen".Het Resultaat: Door USAG-1 te blokkeren, wordt de natuurlijke "rem" opgeheven. Hierdoor kunnen de belangrijke groeifactoren (zoals BMP-signalen, die essentieel zijn voor de vorming van bot en tanden) weer hun werk doen. Dit kan de slapende tandknoppen activeren om een volledig nieuw tand te vormen, compleet met wortel en kroon.
Wat het kan:
Een compleet nieuwe, functionele tand laten groeien op de plek van een verloren tand.Dit zou een revolutionaire oplossing kunnen bieden voor tandverlies, waardoor kunstgebitten en implantaten mogelijk overbodig worden.
Wat het NIET kan (nog niet):
Het is nog een experimentele technologie. De ontwikkeling is nog in de beginfase.De eerste behandelingen zullen waarschijnlijk gericht zijn op specifieke groepen, zoals kinderen met aangeboren tand-afwezigheid (hypodontie).
Leveringsmethode & Behandeling:
Omdat het medicijn (TRG-035) een antilichaam is, moet het systemisch worden toegediend, dus in de bloedbaan. De huidige methode is een intraveneuze injectie. Dit is nodig om alle mogelijke sluimerende tandknoppen in de kaak te kunnen bereiken.Een pleister is hiervoor veel te beperkt qua bereik.
Termijn:
Eerste paar jaar (nu tot ~2026/2027): We zijn hier nu in de eerste fase van menselijke klinische studies (Fase I), die zich puur richten op de veiligheid en dosering van het medicijn bij gezonde volwassenen. Er is nog géén bewijs van effectiviteit bij mensen.Eerste 5 jaar (~2026-2031): Als de veiligheidsstudies positief zijn, volgen Fase II en III studies. Dit zijn grotere studies om de effectiviteit te bewijzen. De meest optimistische schatting voor commerciële beschikbaarheid van dit type volledige tandregeneratie ligt rond 2030 of later. Dit is een zeer hoopvolle schatting, met veel "mitsen en maren".Eerste 10 jaar en verder: Als alles goed gaat, kan dit een revolutie betekenen in tandheelkunde. Patiënten met tandverlies zouden in de toekomst letterlijk een nieuwe tand kunnen "laten groeien".

Samenvattend op Termijn:OnderzoekstypeWat het doetHuidige Status (indicatief)Verwachte Beschikbaarheid (Optimistisch)Kern WetenschapLeveringDentine-Herstel (bv. Tideglusib)Helpt bestaande tand om dentine van binnenuit te herstellenKlinische studies (mensen)3-5 jaar (beperkte toep.)Stimuleert stamcellen via Wnt/β-catencine routeLokaal (bv. sponsje in caviteit)Nieuwe Tanden Groeien (bv. USAG-1 remmer)Activeert slapende tandknoppen om nieuwe tand te vormenFase I menselijke studies~2030 of laterBlokkeert USAG-1 remmer, activeert BMP routeSystemisch (bv. injectie)
Belangrijke Opmerking: De aangegeven termijnen zijn optimistisch. Wetenschappelijke doorbraken kunnen vertraging oplopen door onverwachte resultaten in studies, regelgevingsprocessen of productieproblemen.
